Perfect Storm to End Fossil Fuel Era
280
https://t.co/mu33ZeToxI

About the Scheme

Greedy oil and gas companies are trying to entice investors into sinking more money into a dying venture. The reality is that oil prices are falling and people are rising up to defend their communities from fracking, pipelines, refineries and all sorts of nasty fossil fuel infrastructure.

Building on Flood Wall Street, we’ve concocted a scheme based around the theme: “A Perfect Storm: Oil Prices Falling, People Rising.” Our perfect storm will overwhelm a major energy corporation’s annual investor meeting on February 9 in New York City. Combining street protest with art and song, we will send a message to these dirty energy stakeholders that fossil fuels are completely washed up and sustainable energy is the coming tidal wave of investment. For those who are interested in something more adventurous, we will also have an 'inside' theatrical and disruptive component as well.

Timeline

Between now and February 7th: We will have a series of conference calls to prepare for the day of action. Participation in all of the calls is not required. We will provide a schedule of calls to all scheme members after you join the scheme.

We will have a series of conference calls to prepare for the day of action. Participation in all of the calls is not required. We will provide a schedule of calls to all scheme members after you join the scheme. Week of February 2nd: Artists will gather to make puppets and signs for the action

Artists will gather to make puppets and signs for the action February 8th: MANDATORY rehearsal day to go over the plan and make sure everyone is ready!

MANDATORY rehearsal day to go over the plan and make sure everyone is ready! February 9th: Day of Action!

Needs

Here’s what we need inside the meeting: Videographers: 2-4 people inside the event dedicated to shooting video. If you have a digital camera, great! A decent camera phone and a steady hand will also suffice. Corporate Impersonators: 2 brave people willing to get onstage before meeting and make an announcement as the corporation. Disrupters: at least 5 people willing to stand up and say/do something disruptive during meeting. Faux Investors: at least 1 person to pose as an investor to speak to media about why they are no longer investing in fossil fuels. Instigating Crowd: 8-10 people to leave the room and encourage others to do the same when “security” announces after the disruptions that they are clearing the room.

Here’s what we need outside the meeting: 50 (or more) people to hold signs, banners, and all manner of art and sing songs

Here’s what we need to prepare and pull off the action: A space that can hold 50+ people that we can use all day on February 8th to prepare for the action A songwriter who can write and lead us all in one or more fun musical numbers People to make the signs, banners, and art we will hold. One person who can organize all of the artists some time during the week of February 2nd to spend a day or evening making the art Experienced trainers who can help us run a training on Feb 8th to prepare everyone for the action People comfortable with fielding press requests, writing press releases, and handling PR in general Video editor who can assist with creating a video of the action to post on social media



How to join us
