Mailbag: Bikes on Basin
302
http://www.noladefender.com/content/mailbag-bikes-basin

One reader is very angry about bikers’ rights, particularly the lane on Basin Street. Douglas Duckworth writes to the media and the City to air his concerns about imminent dismemberment if the situation is not remedied. Colonel Mark Jernigan responds to his concerns and offers action from his department.

Good Afternoon,

New Orleans ranks among the most dangerous cities for cyclists:

http://www.nola.com/traffic/index.ssf/2014/04/new_orleans_ranks_high_for_bic.html

Cycling infrastructure that separates bikes from cars, especially on streets like Basin where automobiles move rather fast, improves safety for those who prefer active transportation over carbon dioxide producing automobiles. However, such positive infrastructural improvements become useless when obstructed by valet parking.

I live in Treme, work on Poydras, and bike down the shared Basin Street bus / bike lanes every day. The millions spent on Basin are an absolutely fantastic step forward. After near death on Orleans Avenue in 2012, and another close call on Broad, I stopped biking entirely.

Yet this wider dedicated lane makes me feel safe and so I started biking again.

However, the Saenger Theater often obstructs the riverside Basin shared bus / bike lane with cones for valet parking. In defiance I bike through the cones, dogging VIP SUV's, as this shared lane was constructed in accordance with our codified Complete Streets ordinance. Please remove Valet Parking from this shared lane. We must lower the risk of cycling as the rewards extend beyond improving public safety.

New Orleans faces an unparalleled threat from global warming. Baton Rouge and Washington DC might be captured by Big Oil yet we can make significant local progress by prioritizing people over cars. I urge you to increase demand for active transportation and transit, by continuing the trend of infrastructural expansion, while ensuring our new public investments are not incrementally eroded by narrow private interests. Risk-averse residents are more likely to try cycling if we enact the right public policies and make sure they're implemented properly.

Protect our Complete Streets by removing Valet Parking from the shared Basin Street bus / bike lane.

Thanks

Douglas Duckworth

MSc Urban Planning

New Orleans, LA

Good Evening Col Jernigan,

The dedicated Basin Bike / Bus Lane can only be categorized as a complete failure. Let's ignore the fact that the roads were tore up for utility work after the project was completed so we no longer have smooth pavement on which to ride. Tonight I was nearly killed on Basin cycling downriver to my home in Treme from my office on Poydras. Two SUV's were parked obstructing the bike lane outside the Saenger Theater so I was forced into traffic with vehicles on both sides less than three feet away. We made improvements on Basin to prevent such dangerous situations.

Taxpayers spent $10,00,000 on Basin in order to improve RTA headways and protect non-driving New Orleanians from arguably our most nation’s most negligent drivers. Yet during rush hour, cars occupy the upriver lane heading towards Canal. In the evening the opposite occurs as commuters hastily exist the CBD. As with tonight, it is quite common to see the downriver lane used as the Saenger Theater's private loading zone. New Orleans will only be considered "bike friendly” when cyclists are no longer forced into fast-moving traffic. Without proper implementation - including enforcement - even the best planning and design interventions become ephemeral.

Citywide the NOPD should be ticketing individuals who park illegally in bike lanes as well as those who park illegally on French Quarter sidewalks. If the NOPD are too busy to ticket motorists then separate the Basin lane entirely from automobile traffic using basic bollards common in San Francisco [ http://tinyurl.com/qdfze5t ]. Many aspects of New Orleans culture must be preserved while those that needlessly threaten the lives of cyclists and pedestrians should change immediately. As steward of our streets it is your responsibility to take action. Will cyclist lives become this administration's priority before or after I am dismembered at Basin and Canal?

Respectfully,

Douglas Charles Duckworth

MSc Urban Planning

Linux BOFH

Indebted Prole

Mr. Duckworth,

Thank you for your feedback and interest making the City's streets safer for all users, to include bicyclists.

DPW closely monitors the condition and usage of all bicycle lanes in the City. I'm not sure when you were riding in this area yesterday, but when I passed by the Saenger Theater last night at about 5:45 pm on my way to a neighborhood community meeting, I didn't observe the conditions you referred to. On other occasions, I have observed traffic from the Saenger encroaching into the dedicated bus/bike lane and have met with the theater operators in an attempt to address this in the past.

Based on your concerns, I will have my staff assess the ridership, utilization, safety, and effectiveness of this dedicated bus/bike lane over the next 60-90 days. In the meantime, the Saenger Theater operator will be contacted concerning proper usage of the dedicated bus/bicycle lane on Basin St and this area will receive additional attention from DPW parking enforcement staff.

Regards,

Mark D. Jernigan, P.E., PMP, LTC (Ret)

Director, Department of Public Works

City of New Orleans

1300 Perdido St, Suite 6W03

New Orleans, LA 70112

The text above is a letter to the editor and expresses only the opinion of the author, not NOLA Defender or NOLA Defender's Editorial Board.
