CBA9: 9th conference on community-based adaptation to climate change
325
http://www.iied.org/cba9-9th-conference-community-based-adaptation-climate-change

Organised by the International Institute for Environment and Development (IIED), Bangladesh Centre for Advanced Studies (BCAS) and African Centre for Technology Studies (ACTS), this year's conference theme is 'Measuring and enhancing effective adaptation'.

CBA9 will begin with optional field visits scheduled for 24-26 April, followed by the conference at the Safari Park Hotel from 27-30 April. Full details of the programme of events and fees can be found below, with an early-bird discount discount available until 11.59pm on 31 January, 2015.

Programme

Download the draft programme (PDF).

April 23: Arrival for those participating in the field visits

April 24-26: Field visits

April 27-30: Conference (Safari Park Hotel, Kasarani, Nairobi, Kenya)

If you are unable to register at this time, please make sure to sign up to receive updates and alerts.

Registration fees

When applying to attend CBA9, you must be ready to pay when you register. Please read the Registration and payment method details below. Registrations will close one month prior to the commencement of CBA9 (field visits will close as soon as they are full).

Early bird* fee:

Field visits + conference (April 23-26) = £600 GBP

Conference only (April 27-30) = £350 GBP

Standard fee:

Field visits + conference (April 23-26) = £650 GBP

Conference only (April 27-30) = £400 GBP

*Early bird registration fees apply to all registrations received before 11.59pm on 31 January, 2015.

Registration and payment method

To register for CBA9, click on the button below, which will take you to the CBA9 Eventbrite page.

​Payments can be made using Mastercard, Visa, Visa Debit and American Express credit cards. If you need to register a group of people in one payment, please choose the number of people you are paying for and, during the registration process, insert the registration details of one of the delegates. Once you have paid you will have to receive a separate link from the organisers where the remaining delegates can register with a unique code associated to your payment. Alternative payment options, such as paying by bank transfer, are available for organisations wishing to purchase multiple staff tickets. Contact us by email via CBAconference@iied.org t o make appropriate arrangements . We strongly encourage you to pay by credit card since bank transfers will delay the registration process and can cause additional costs, however, we understand this is not an option to all. Once your payment has been received you will obtain a confirmation code and a link that will allow you to complete the registration process.

Your registration is not confirmed until full payment of the registration fee has been received. There is no need to print out the confirmation. If you have any questions, please contact us at CBAconference@iied.org. Read our refund and cancellation policy.

Unfortunately we do not have funding available to sponsor participants for this event. If you're unable to attend, coverage of CBA9 will be available via IIED's Twitter service and associated platforms, and will appear on this page during the conference.

Field visits

The field visits will last three days, departing Nairobi from the Safari Park Hotel early in the morning on April 24. You must be in Nairobi the night before in order to attend the briefing dinner on the evening of the 23rd at the Safari Park Hotel where you will be able to register and receive your delegate pack. Read full information on field visits.

Further information will be provided once full details of the field visits become available (February), at which point those who have registered will be able to choose their preferred site on a first-come, first-served basis.

Conference

The conference will begin the morning of April 27 with an opening ceremony at the Safari Park Hotel (by invitation only). After the opening session the conference will only be open to registered participants.

The conference will run for three-and-a-half days and will include a combination of high-level speaker panels, thematic plenary and parallel sessions with group discussions, short film sessions and interactive sessions for those who enjoy a more hands-on approach to learning. Poster presentations will share project and programme activities related to the conference theme.

Details on the programme and presentations will be made available at a later date. The conference will close at midday on April 30 with a closing ceremony. Read full information on the conference.

Visas and accomodation

Please make sure to enquire in your country of origin if you will need a visa to travel to Nairobi. Participants are responsible for arranging their own accommodation during the conference, but IIED has negotiated special rates with hotels in the area, including the Safari Park Hotel. Read more information on CBA9 visas and accommodation.

Presenting information and exhibitions

Options for oral presentations at CBA8 include being a keynote speaker or discussants/panellists, sharing work via a poster or presenting a short film. There will also be exhibition booths available to rent. Find out more about presenting information at CBA9.

After the conference

UNEP will host an optional visit to the UN complex on the afternoon of 30 April. The visit will include a tour of the complex, launch of the CLIMWARN report, an opportunity to view the voices of the Mau project display and tea/coffee. A short shopping stop at the Maasai market near the complex will be arranged en-route back to the hotel. Prior registration is necessary and buses leave the hotel at 2.30pm on 30 April after the CBA9 closing ceremony. Please email cbaconference@iied.org if you are interested in attending.

Other opportunities for further activity after the conference will be made available here, including a three to four-day Masaai Mara safari experience at a special discount rate for CBA9 guests. Please email cbaconference@iied.org for more details.

The CBA conference background

IIED and partners such as BCAS created the CBA conferences to highlight that effective adaptation to climate change takes place at community level.

A bottom-up approach to adaptation enables local knowledge and practices to be shared among communities, academics and project managers so that those most exposed to the impacts of climate change are better able to adapt.

Past CBA conferences have focused on scaling up best practice, ensuring a scientific basis to action, communicating and mainstreaming CBA, and ensuring adaptation funding reaches community level.

Last year, the 8th community-based adaptation to climate change conference (CBA8) took place in Nepal in April 2014 and the theme was Financing Local Adaptation.

More than 400 participants from more than 60 countries attended CBA8, during which the latest developments in community-based adaptation financing, planning and best practices were shared and the Kathmandu Declaration was launched, which saw delegates call for a radical shift in flows of finance to ensure the most vulnerable communities can adapt to climate change.

Aims and objectives of CBA9

CBA9 will highlight that there are different ways of measuring the success of community-based adaptation, and underline that effective evaluation considers the perspective of both the donor as well as recipients of adaptation funding.

"Adaptation around the world, including Community-Based Adaptation (CBA), is moving from planning to implementation," says Dr Saleemul Huq, senior fellow at IIED. "With this shift well under way, we need to find ways to make adaptation more effective as well as more sophisticated ways to measure the impact of adaptation projects."

Read more about community-based adaptation in this special issue of Participatory Learning and Action.
