Empowering youth to prepare for the effects of climate change
358
http://2050kids.org.previewc40.carrierzone.com/2015/01/30/the-world-we-want/

The United Nations launch of The World We Want calls on citizens everywhere to sign up and share their priorities to build “a collective vision that will be used directly by the United Nations and World Leaders to plan a new development agenda launching in 2015, one that is based on the aspirations of all citizens!”

The Global Survey enables participants to prioritize, discuss and investigate 11 issues: Conflict and Fragility, Education, Energy, Environmental Sustainability, Food Security, Governance, Growth and Employment, Health, Inequalities, Population Dynamics and Water.

The project coincides with the release of the 17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), which will be finalized at this September’s UN Summit

The SDGs incorporate climate change and development in framing universal targets which apply regardless of the economic status of any country.

Climate change threatens to destroy the lives of millions more and undo all the progress we have made so far. Inequality is growing everywhere and human rights are being undermined in the worlds most fragile and conflict affected countries while the world economy continues to falter. Despite all of this, for the first time in history we do have the resources to end poverty and grow our world sustainably. It will take the work of all of us to make this happen and we must make our Governments listen and take action on the things that matter most to people everywhere!

As the timeframe for achieving the eight Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) concludes in 2015, significant challenges remain:

1.4 billion people live in extreme poverty

Every 4 seconds a child dies from preventable causes

Over 900 million women and young children are malnourished

58 million children lack access to a primary education

The most vulnerable populations face the most serious threats from climate change

To ensure that the rights of children are at the centerpiece of the Sustainable Development Goals, UNICEF has announced the #EveryChild2015 campaign:

A universal agenda that protects the rights of all children everywhere to get the best start in life, to survive and thrive, to receive a quality education, to live free from violence and abuse and participate in decisions that affect their lives is essential and all countries must commit to pursuing the goals and targets through national action. Investments in early childhood development is one of the most critical and cost-effective ways to give all children an equal opportunity and can break the cycle of poverty to create a more sustainable and prosperous world.

2050kids educational projects are informed by social cognitive learning theory, the role of intrinsic motivation and self-efficacy in highly contextualized real life project-based educational models.

.
