Ocean heat content is climbing so quickly that the tracking chart 'broke'
48
http://mashable.com/2015/01/23/ocean-warming-broke-chart/#:eyJzIjoidCIsImkiOiJfNnZzOGttYmxucm4xcnp4biJ9

The past two weeks have brought new signs that global warming is not only continuing, but may in some respects be accelerating. Three independent agencies in the United States and Japan made the announcement that 2014 was most likely the warmest year on record since at least 1880, and very likely for several millennia before that.

The only major land mass that featured relatively cool temperatures for the year — but still warmer than average — was parts of the U.S. and Canada.

There was also word that the concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere has already been nudging above 400 parts per million, a symbolic milestone first reached for an extended period in 2013. This is the highest level of this global warming pollutant in all of human history.

See also: Exclusive video: Forthcoming PBS series aims to reinvent the nature show

We also found out that ocean temperatures reached record levels in 2014, with portions of every major ocean basin attaining new highs. But there is more to the ocean temperature measurements than first meets the eye, since we tend to focus more on sea surface temperatures.

It turns out that in recent years, a huge amount of heat has been pumped into the deep oceans, as evident on charts showing the heat content of the large slice of the ocean between 0 and 2,000 meters deep, or down to about 6,500 feet.

In fact, according to John Abraham, a professor at the University of St. Thomas School of Engineering in Minnesota and a writer for The Guardian, 2014 featured a huge uptake in oceanic heat. The additional heat was so significant that it broke the chart that scientists use to track such changes, he wrote on Thursday.

Here's the chart including heat uptake in 2014, as measured using buoys, ship data, satellites and other observing platforms:

Ocean heat content between the surface and 2,000 meters, showing a sharp rise in recent years. Image: NOAA/John Abraham

And here's the updated chart, which takes the timespan out to 2020 in order to allow for further growth in oceanic heat content.

Updated chart of the rise in oceanic heat content. Image: NOAA

"We can now say that the 2014 Earth had more heat (thermal energy) than any year ever recorded by humans," Abraham wrote, referring to both heat in the form of atmospheric heat and oceanic heat absorption.

The reason why oceanic heat uptake is a big deal is because global warming does not abide by Las Vegas rules: What happens in the oceans does not stay in the oceans. While the oceans absorb most of the heat from greenhouse gas-driven global warming (at least 90% by most estimates), they also slowly release it into the atmosphere over time, meaning that faster and more significant increases in ocean heat offer a guarantee of more global warming in the future. Increasing ocean temperatures also contributes to sea level rise, since seawater expands as its temperature rises.

Here's how Stefan Rahmstorf, a professor at the Potsdam Institute of Climate Impact Research in Germany, described the increase in ocean heat content in a 2013 blog post:

The increase in the amount of heat in the oceans amounts to 17 x 1022 Joules over the last 30 years. That is so much energy it is equivalent to exploding a Hiroshima bomb every second in the ocean for thirty years.

The recalibration of the ocean heat content chart is reminiscent of what Australian meteorologists were forced to do in 2013, when a heat wave prompted them to create a new color on weather maps to denote never-before-seen scorching temperatures of 129.2 degrees Fahrenheit, or 54 degrees Celsius.
