At least one home destroyed in Waroona bushfire; DFES emergency warning remains
482
http://www.abc.net.au/news/2015-01-31/emergency-warning-for-bushfire-at-waroona-western-australia/6059250

At least one home destroyed in Waroona bushfire; DFES emergency warning remains

Updated

At least one home has been destroyed by an out-of-control bushfire that continues to threaten lives and homes at Waroona in Western Australia.

An emergency warning remains in place for the blaze, which is moving in a north-westerly direction, and the worst affected area appears to be Lyons Road.

DFES said it has unconfirmed reports of damage to three homes on Lyons Road.

A spokesperson for the Department of Fire and Emergency Services (DFES) told a community meeting that fire activity had slowed, but could flare again as temperatures rise and winds pick up.

This morning the blaze entered the town, which is about 110 kilometres south of Perth, and DFES warned embers were likely to be blown around homes, starting spot fires.

About 50 people have taken shelter in the Waroona town hall, however the evacuation centre is being moved to the town hall in nearby Harvey, located on the corner of Young Street and Uduk Street.

People have been advised to evacuate their homes if the way is clear but DFES duty assistant commissioner Chris Arnol said residents should take their location into consideration when planning how to respond.

"It depends on where they are," Mr Arnol said.

"We've asked some residents to shelter in place which is the best option for them and others to evacuate to Harvey," he said.

I'd never seen anything like it in my life ... it was pretty daunting seeing it race down the hill, it rolled down the hill in no time. Waroona resident Dion

"People should have their fire plans ready and know what to do."

Efforts are focussed on preventing the spread of the fire and the full extent of the damage has not yet been assessed.

"The fire is still very erratic. We're having variable wind speed and variable direction so it's making it very difficult for us," DFES spokesman Ryan Murray said.

"There's approximately 70 to 80 firefighting vehicles with about 200 firefighters on site at the moment and air efforts should be in place shortly."

Town fills with smoke as residents flee flames

Waroona resident Dion said the blaze came within several metres of his home.

"I'd never seen anything like it in my life, it made me pretty sick to my stomach," he told 720 ABC Perth.

"It was pretty daunting seeing it race down the hill, it rolled down the hill in no time.

"We were pretty much watering down the roof as it kind of whipped past the outside of the house.

"We have a big tree at least 25 metres tall in the paddock next door and that lit up and that's what caused most of our issues.

"It had flames and ash just coming off the top of it, lifting into the air and carrying down the street."

Gina Fiorenza, who works at the Waroona Roadhouse, said she thought about 90 per cent of the town had evacuated ahead of the flames.

She said the area was "literally just smoked out".

"It's hit the heart of the town," she said. "One lady she's come in, her house, it's just gone, she can't go anywhere near it."

Ms Fiorenza said she left her home near the centre of town to throw open the doors of the roadhouse to allow firefighters coming from Perth to refuel.

"I've gone to work but I've packed my bag and got my car ready, so whenever we get the [warning], we're going and we're heading out," she said.

The manager of the Waroona caravan park, Visnja Dojkovic, said the fire was in the golf course bordering the park this morning as she helped evacuate about 25 sites.

She said it was the worst fire she had seen in her 16 years living in the town.

"It's too close, too close for comfort," she said.

Roads closed, messages sent to residents

The South West Highway is closed between the intersection of Mayfield Road to the north of Waroona and Willowdale Road to the south.

South West Highway is closed to all traffic entering Waroona however vehicles can still leave the area.

Telephone text and voice messages have been issued to people living in the town.

DFES had advised people who have stayed to defend their homes to get to a room away from the fire front with two exits and running water.

If their home catches fire, residents are being warned to get out to an area of land that has already been burned.

Topics: bushfire, waroona-6215, wa

First posted
