The Coal Industry Owns The Courts (VIDEO)
544
http://www.desmogblog.com/2015/01/30/coal-industry-owns-courts-video?utm_medium=twitter&utm_source=twitterfeed

In early February 2014, Duke Energy reported that a coal ash storage site along the Dan River had crumbled, releasing more than 39,000 tons of toxic coal ash into the waterway. This was not the first time that Duke had been responsible for a massive coal ash spill, and most likely not the last.

In public, the company claimed that it is making all the necessary moves to clean up the mess and prevent future disasters. But behind closed doors, the company was hard at work making sure that its negligence would never hinder its profits. Duke Energy had been paying off the right people to prevent any meaningful form of punishment.

The post-Citizens United world has led to an enormous increase in the amount of money flowing to judicial elections, which was previously an area that very few corporations gave a second look. But with a green light to throw cash around now, they’ve realized that owning the Judicial Branch of American government is just as lucrative as owning a politician.

During the 2014 midterm elections, the state of North Carolina — Duke Energy’s base of operations — became a hotbed for judicial campaign spending. In total, an unprecedented $800,000 was spent on judicial elections by a group called Justice For All NC, with more than $300,000 of that total coming solely from Duke Energy.

A recent report by the Center for American Progress (CAP) shows that elected judges are far more likely to vote in favor of corporations (those who funded their elections) than non-elected judges, explaining Duke Energy’s desire to pump hundreds of thousands of dollars into this campaign.

For Duke, it paid off. For residents that have been harmed by Duke’s negligence, not so much.

CAP has put together a short film explaining the plight of local residents who have been poisoned by Duke Energy, particularly the victims of last year’s Dan River coal ash spill. The video is below, or you can find it on YouTube here.

The North Carolina judicial elections, as well as the ongoing litigation against Duke Energy will serve as a litmus test for other states. Should Duke Energy continue to emerge the victor in legal battles, expect to see countless other corporations following in its footsteps.
