Britons believe in climate change... but do they care?
607
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/news/earth/environment/climatechange/11375124/Britons-believe-in-climate-change...-but-do-they-care.html

The overwhelming majority of Britons believe in climate change but fewer than one in five is very worried about it, new research has revealed.

Despite warnings from UN scientists , politicians and even Prince Charles that time is running out to avoid catastrophic global warming, the number of people describing themselves as "very concerned" has more than halved over the past decade.

The proportion of Britons who believe the world's climate is changing now stands at 88 per cent - the highest level since 2005, when it hit 91 per cent.

Belief levels are up significantly from only 72 per cent in early 2013, according to a survey of 1,002 people conducted as part of Government-funded research by the Universities of Cardiff and Nottingham.

Severe flooding that hit the Somerset Levels in winter 2013-14 - which David Cameron linked to climate change - may have influenced opinion, the researchers suggested.

The uptick in belief also covered the period in which Typhoon Haiyan, which was also widely linked to global warming, caused devastation in the Philippines and the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change issued major reports on global warming.

The vast majority - 84 per cent - also believe that climate change is either partly or mainly man-made.

Yet the number describing themselves as "very concerned" fell to just 18 per cent, the survey shows. That was down from 44 per cent in 2005.

Overall, those who were either very or fairly concerned were still the majority, at 68 per cent, but much lower than 2005 highs of 82 per cent.

Dr Stuart Capstick, one of the report's authors, said: "Whilst on a technical or 'cognitive' level people may be more willing to accept the reality and human aspect of climate change, this does not necessarily translate into very high levels of concern at a more personal, emotional level.

"It is possible also that ​people have perhaps grown more used to the topic over time: the warnings of 'time running out'... have been around for some time now."

He said it was important to distinguish between whether people were personally concerned and whether they thought it was an important issue at a national level. The survey found that a "surprisingly high proportion of people" named climate change as one of the major national concerns, he said.

The researchers found that people who had been directly affected by the flooding in the Somerset Levels were "even more convinced of the reality and seriousness of climate change".

A separate survey of 135 people whose properties were damaged by the flooding found higher levels of concern than among the general population, at 78 per cent.

Professor Nick Pidgeon of Cardiff University and lead researcher, said: "Our findings demonstrate that an association between last year's winter flooding and climate change has been forming in the minds of many ordinary people in Britain, who also view these events as a sign of things to come."
