Naomi Klein On Why 2015 Is A Once-In-A-Generation Moment For Climate Change
645
https://t.co/eAQ274rQlv

What can divesting in fossil fuels change? Everything. But challenging the status quo can only happen once we mobilize. That's why we're particularly excited about Global Divestment Day, happening on February 13 and 14. Around the world, young leaders are inspiring institutions and people of power to rethink the way they invest through workshops, protests, and art.

Read Now: A College Senior Is Single-Handedly Changing How The Country's Biggest Schools Invest Their Money

Need ideas to get inspired? Then you'll want to check out 350.org's web workshop with Naomi Klein, the author of This Changes Everything. Through their talk, Naomi expands on her book's ultimate concept -- how we can redefine our economic models to save the planet.

What do low oil prices mean for the climate movement? What needs to happen in 2015 to create real action? Klein answered these questions and more. "This is about sending the message that this is everywhere," Naomi Klein told 350.org's director, May Boeve.

Here are some of Klein's main points from the chat:

Low Oil Prices As A Catalyst For (Positive And Negative) Change

Image via justine warrington

Klein pointed out that one of her previous books, The Shock Doctrine, is about how moments of shock and crisis - including dramatic changes in the market - can be catalysts for change. However, these moments are often used to create the wrong kind of change.

Think about our current situation: oil prices are low. As such, we're reading stories about the comeback of the SUV.

But Naomi stresses that nothing is preordained. If we do nothing, nothing will happen.

We Haven't Had A Moment Like This Since 2008

Image via Alden Phinney

Klein remembers how 2008 was a moment for change - that was ultimately wasted. Back then, Obama was elected, car companies were bankrupt, and it was time for a stimulus bill. But it eventually became a moment of demobilization.

Right now, Klein argues we're in an equally important moment. She talked about how political parties need vision for what the next economy will look like. And the climate movement should be a part of that conversation.

In many ways it already is. Klein pulled out last week's copy of The Economist to show viewers the cover story, "Seize The Day," which also argues we have "a once-in-a-generation opportunity to fix bad energy policies." And that's just one story. Klein points out how this is cemented through other climate change news, the landscape of divestment, lower prices in the renewable energy sector, and COP 21 happening later this year in Paris.

If we get the right incentives involved, Klein argues it's a perfect way to get off fossil fuels and have a decentralized economy.

Why Now Is Even Better Than 2008 To Create Real Change.

Image via Jake Soiffer

Right now, fracking projects are stopping. Klein says this little reprieve and breathing room will ultimately make it easier to win political victories - even if they're against gargantuan companies. But that will only last while oil prices are low.

"This is a window," she says. "I don't think a carbon tax is a silver bullet." But "it's part of a slate of policies" needed for change.

The climate movement today is not Al Gore's movement. "It's a lot clearer about who we're fighting for and who we're fighting against," she says. "It's easier to fight for visionary policies that then have their own movement."

But mostly, Klein argues that more than ever that this is an issue of values - not just economics. "We have to focus on what happens within people's hearts," she says.

What Needs To Happen In 2015

Image via Jake Soiffer

"We refuse to break out of our silos," says Klein. "It doesn't intersect nearly enough for fighting those against austerity."

We understand this problem intellectually, and Klein does have a huge point here. Yet there are specific reasons why we could actually break out of our silos, support groups with similar beliefs, and come together with one unified mission.

Klein points out that she personally has a lot of hope for COP 21 since its in Europe. "Anti-austerity is big in politics," she says. "It's poised to win elections."

As such, Klein says she thinks various movements should be able to get their point across in a business card. What are we fighting for? "We're fighting for free public transit," she uses as an example inspired by the time she launched her book in the Netherlands and Belgium. At the time, both countries were having rotating rail strikes. "We need to get off the defense and mobilize all of these groups."

And part of that involves PR. Klein points out that climate activists have used the globe as an icon. "This movement is powered by the people fighting for the places they love," she says. "It's not about the hatred of fossil fuels. It's about protecting the land and water for future generations."

Where To Put Divested Funds

Image via Chloe Maxmin

Klein points out that where to actually invest is trickier than a call to action to divest funds. Why?

"What we want to invest in will be different everywhere we live," she explains. "It shouldn't be, 'Bye carbon, hello wind and solar." As such, we need to develop tools and projects that can be supported and prioritized for each community differently.

Want more? Watch the entire chat here:

Lede image via Green Blog
