Find Installers & Compare UK Prices
7
http://www.theecoexperts.co.uk/

Solar Panel Prices & Information





How can I save money with solar panels?

Fitting solar panels to your home could typically help lower your electricity bills by £125 per year. The government’s Feed-in Tariff scheme also means you could earn around £750 per year for the energy produced, exported and saved. Click here to learn more.

How much will my property earn?

You can use our new solar calculator to work out the total savings you will make by installing solar panels at your property. Click here to use the calculator.

How can solar panels help the environment?

Installing solar panels will help the average family home cut their carbon footprint dramatically. By using renewable energy instead of fossil fuels you could save over a tonne of carbon dioxide per year.

How simple is it to have panels installed?

A surveyor will come round and assess your roof to see if it is suitable and give you a quote. If it is should take only take a few days to install your panels. But, why not click on the case studies below, to see what our satisfied customers have to say.

How can we help?

Fill out our form and get up to four quotes within minutes. Not only that we have trusted accredited suppliers all over the country, so wherever you are, we can help you begin your journey.

We are the Eco Experts

Compare solar prices in your area Enter Your Postcode

Meet the team

Daniel Tobin Founder Dan founded The Eco Experts in 2010. Since that point he has successfully developed relationships with some of the UK's leading installers and energy companies. This allows The Eco Experts to offer visitors the opportunity to connect quickly with their local and trusted installers. "The Eco Experts offers consumers a real alternative to rising energy prices and helps them to be more environmentally conscious of their energy use. The success we have had in the past three years is fantastic, and I am excited that the future for both domestic and commercial renewables is bright."

Dan Braham UK Business Development Dan has been working with The Eco Experts for the past year. He knows the solar industry inside out and has an established relationship with both the largest and smaller independent installers across the UK. Since joining The Eco Experts Dan has helped ensure that visitors are always connected with the most local and trusted installers in their area. "I massively enjoy working with The Eco Experts team and in the solar sector. Where we get our energy from is more relevant now then ever before to most people, and I am proud to be on the team supporting renewables."

John Evans Business Development Manager John has worked with The Eco Experts since it was founded. He has established and maintained relationships with the UK's leading Solar Panel installers and has a respected opinion which is recognised across the industry. "The solar industry has thrown up some challenges in recent times, but The Eco Experts have a stable and respected brand that has allowed us to continue to grow and offer a service that our customers and clients are finding ever useful."

David Thomas Writer David is an established writer who has featured on some of the UK's leading Green and Renewable sites. In charge of managing The Eco Experts Blog he ensures that the site always has a clear and open voice within the sector whilst offering consumers the opportunity to learn to tips and advice to becoming more energy efficient.

Becky Harper Customer Advice Manager Becky has been working with the Eco Experts since it's launch; she now manages a team of around 10 customer advisors. Overseeing her team and ever at the heart of the operation Becky is able to give help and advice to consumers considering a renewable energy in a personal and considerate way. "I love that the brand, it is ever evolving and its great to be making a positive change to the environment through my job. Renewable technologies are the future for the planet so its exciting to be at the forefront of that through the Eco Experts."

Alex Vasili Website Manager Alex has been working on The Eco Experts website since May 2013. His role is to ensure that the site is always providing the most relevant and up to date information to help anyone considering a domestic or commercial renewable installation start their journey. Alex takes an active interest in the world of renewables, writing for some of the leading renewable and Green agenda websites across the web as well as contributing to The Eco Experts blog.

We are The Eco Experts, the UK’s number one solar panel comparison site. Every year we help thousands of people compare the cost of solar panels from the UK’s top installers. Over the last 4 years, we've been a part of over a quarter of all the installations undertaken in the UK.
