Bad idea: Shell’s gearing up to start drilling in the Arctic again
182
http://www.salon.com/2015/01/29/bad_idea_shells_gearing_up_to_start_drilling_in_the_arctic_again/

Topics: Shell Oil, Arctic drilling, Climate Change, fossil fuels, Conservation, Sustainability News, Business News, News

Neither risk of an oil spill nor global climate change nor the falling price of oil will keep Shell from exploiting the Arctic’s oil.

After suspending its Arctic program for years following the grounding of one of its drilling rigs, the company announced Thursday that it plans to start drilling this summer in Alaska’s Chukchi Sea.

“Will we go ahead?” CEO Ben van Beurden said during the company’s fourth quarter results conference. “Yes if we can. I’d be so disappointed if we wouldn’t.”

It’s a perplexing decision. For one thing, Arctic drilling is an inherently risky activity, and Shell has a poor track record of getting it right. And even when it is done right, says Mackenzie Funk, who reported an in-depth e-book on the company’s 2012 Arctic fiasco, it’s incredibly expensive. “Simply the practicality of getting giant rigs up there, the practicality of getting oil from that far away from the rest of us to market is a huge, huge undertaking,” Funk recently told Salon.

“We will only do this if we feel that we can do it responsibly,” van Beurden told the BBC, adding, “I think that we are as well prepared as any company can be to mitigate the risks.” But Funk’s take on Shell’s prospects for safe drilling basically came down to whether the company’s going to be willing to invest enough money in the project to do it right. Seeing as how the announcement comes at a time when the price of crude oil is at a six-year low, it’s hard to imagine how they expect to do both that and profit at the same time.

Shell already plans to cut spending by more than $15 billion over the next three years due to dwindling revenues. Despite that, “Shell hasn’t taken the opportunity to cut its most high-cost high-risk project,” Greenpeace’s Charlie Kronick said in a statement. “It’s time for investors to recognise that it’s impossible for Shell to justify its continued pursuit of offshore Arctic oil.”
