Vanuatu climate change and disaster risk reduction policy out for public consultation
184
http://www.preventionweb.net/english/professional/news/v.php?id=42145

Vanuatu climate change and disaster risk reduction policy out for public consultation

Date: 30 Jan 2015

Source(s): Vanuatu - government



The Ministry of Climate Change and Natural Disasters, in consultation with other government agencies, provincial governments, civil society and other stakeholders, has developed a draft Vanuatu Climate Change and Disaster Risk Reduction Policy. The project is supported by the United Nations Development Program and Australian Aid. The proposed policy document was released for public consultation on 30 January 2015.



The Director-General of the Ministry of Climate Change and Natural Disasters, Mr Jotham Napat, said, ‘This policy is an opportunity for Vanuatu to identify its vision, principles, priorities and strategies to drive and integrate climate change and disaster risk reduction activities across all levels into the future. Since climate change and disaster risks potentially impact on all of us across the country, it is important that the Ministry consults with as broad a range of stakeholders as possible in developing the policy. Provincial governments and civil society and private sector bodies are encouraged to send the draft policy out to their networks to ensure as wide a reach as possible.’



The document draws on extensive consultation processes, including an inception workshop in Port Vila and workshops in all provinces during late 2014. It also takes into consideration policy at regional and global levels, as well as across the many industry sectors impacted by climate change and disaster risks.



The policy development process has involved many stakeholders over the past few years. Any member of the public interested in obtaining a copy of the proposed policy and providing comments can access the document at www.nab.vu or contact the Ministry on 24686. Feedback on the policy is due to be provided by Friday, 13 February 2015. Comments should be sent to Malcolm Dalesa, at mdalesa@meteo.gov.vu or posted to the Project Management Unit, Vanuatu Meteorology and Geo-hazards Department, Ministry of Climate Change, PMB 9054, Port Vila.



Following this public consultation process, a national validation workshop hosted by the Minister for Climate Change and Natural Disasters, the Honourable James Bule, will be held on 17 February. The policy will then undergo final drafting before submission to the Council of Ministers for approval, expected in March 2015.

Additional information

http://www.nab.vu/vanuatu-climate-change-and-disaster-risk-r...

Related Links

Keywords

Themes: Climate Change, Governance

Countries/Regions: Vanuatu



Short URL: http://preventionweb.net/go/42145
