Metro Area Results
189
http://riskybusiness.org/reports/midwest-report/metro-area-results

While the Midwest region of the United States can be characterized by its distinct location, culture, and outsized economic impact on national and global agriculture and manufacturing, the region is far from monolithic. To recognize the diverse nature of this region, especially in terms of climate impacts, we have pulled out the ten metro areas of the Midwest for individual analysis.

Figure 8: Midwest Metro Areas The 10 metro region clusters (blue) are based on the U.S. Department of Commerce’s “cluster mapping” project and encompass the relevant regional markets surrounding the metro areas.

Data Source: Rhodium Group

Over 80% of the region's residents live in these broader metro areas, which are based on the definitions that are used in the U.S. Department of Commerce's "cluster mapping" project. This project organizes the country into "regional concentrations of related industries" 17 formed around cities and their surrounding suburbs, or sometimes on aggregations of multiple metro areas. The clusters are based on relevant regional markets surrounding metro areas and therefore cross state borders in some instances (e.g. the Minneapolis-St. Paul metro area, which extends into Wisconsin, or the St. Louis metro area, which extends into Illinois).

Though the region's economic activity tends to be concentrated in these metro areas, none of them operates in a vacuum. Several—e.g., St. Louis, Kansas City, Chicago, and Detroit—are major transportation hubs, connecting Midwest industries to the rest of the nation via rail, port, and highway. Chicago and Minneapolis are large global cities, home to international commodities markets and multinational companies. And the entire Midwest region supplies the nation and the globe with key agricultural and manufactured products, from corn and soybeans to auto parts and solar panels.

FOOTNOTES

17 U.S. Cluster Mapping Project, “Cluster: A Regional Concentration of Related Industries," available here.
