Shell Promises Climate Risk Disclosure to Shareholders, but What About Its Political Spending?
194
http://blog.ucsusa.org/shell-promises-climate-risk-disclosure-to-shareholders-but-what-about-its-political-spending-607?utm_content=bufferdc7d5&utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter.com&utm_campaign=buffer

Yesterday, Royal Dutch Shell made headlines when it announced it would respond to shareholder demands for better consideration and disclosure of the company’s risks from climate change. The move was welcomed by shareholders and activists looking to see Shell better incorporate climate change and its impacts into its business model. The announcement signals that Shell—more so than other oil and gas companies—may be willing to accept the science of climate change and incorporate its risks into its business. But even if Shell follows up with the climate risk report it promises, there will still be one glaring point where the company fails to accept the science.

The incompatibility of Shell’s ALEC membership

A few weeks ago, I wrote about why Shell should leave the American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC). Leading among these reasons is the inconsistency between Shell’s science-supporting public statements on climate change and its membership in ALEC, a group that spreads climate misinformation to influence decision makers and the public. ALEC’s extreme and non-science-based position on climate change does a disservice to lawmakers who should be focused on how to address climate change, rather than hearing misrepresentations of the science. Since that post, more than 100,000 people have joined me in urging Shell to dispel ALEC’s climate disinformation.

Shell’s announcement this week is an important step. It creates a pathway for Shell to seriously consider its risks from and position on climate change, and it provides a mechanism for shareholders and the public to get better information about how Shell manages risks around climate change. However, this move won’t necessarily include a major piece of Shell’s activities around climate change—its indirect political activities through third party groups like ALEC and the American Petroleum Institute. As we’ve seen, many companies including Shell do much of their climate policy advocacy through these groups rather than through direct lobbying. So if we are talking about a company’s actions around climate change, the conversation needs to include company affiliations with these groups.

Aligning Shell’s position on climate change

As Shell responds to shareholders on this resolution, I ask the company to consider re-assessing and disclosing its political spending. As a company moving toward greater integration of climate science into its business plans, Shell should recognize the incompatibility of this science-accepting position with its affiliations with groups like ALEC. I know Shell can do better to align its position and activities with science.

Posted in: Fossil Fuels, Global Warming, Science and Democracy Tags: ALEC, American Petroleum Institute, corporate consistency on climate change, corporate political activities, Shell



About the author: Gretchen Goldman is a lead analyst in the Center for Science and Democracy at UCS. She holds a PhD and MS in environmental engineering from the Georgia Institute of Technology and a BS in atmospheric science from Cornell University. See Gretchen's full bio. Follow her on Twitter at @GretchenTG.

Support from UCS members make work like this possible. Will you join us? Help UCS advance independent science for a healthy environment and a safer world.
