Tackling the Challenge of Climate Change: A Near-Term Actionable Mitigation Agenda
213
http://earthjustice.org/blog/2014-september/tackling-the-challenge-of-climate-change-a-near-term-actionable-mitigation-agenda

Formally released today at the United Nations Climate Summit, Tackling the Challenge of Climate Change: A Near-Term Actionable Mitigation Agenda was commissioned by the Republic of Nauru, Chair of the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS) and written by 30 leading climate and energy experts from around the world.





The report builds on the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the Global Energy Assessment, and information from leading scientific and energy experts to identify the most promising and readily available steps to rapidly lower emissions in the near term. Read the full paper »

Executive Summary

United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon invited world leaders to come to the Climate Summit on September 23, 2014 to deliver “bold pledges” to tackle climate change.

This paper was prepared at the request of the Republic of Nauru, Chair of the Alliance of Small Island States, as part of their answer to that call. We believe the path to the global low-carbon transformation needed to tackle the climate crisis is within reach, but requires decisive political action from leaders around the world, now.

This paper is unabashedly prescriptive on the need for action, but recognizes that there are multiple approaches and models from around the world that can be scaled up and adapted to national circumstances. Cost-effective technologies for a low-carbon economy are being implemented throughout the world, but at nowhere the scale and speed necessary.

Emissions continue to rise. With every year of delay, human suffering, biodiversity loss, and the costs of mitigation and adaptation increase.

We are running out of time.





Continue reading the full paper: Tackling the Challenge of Climate Change: A Near-Term Actionable Mitigation Agenda





Related
