Help Publish "The Anatomy of Severe Weather" by Zach Roberts & Jason Weingart — Kickstarter
320
https://www.kickstarter.com/projects/1239123996/help-publish-the-anatomy-of-severe-weather

Growing up, we would spend hours researching and learning how the weather works. Our main tool would always fall to a book that had large pictures and text explainations. We would spend endless hours studying these books and waiting for the day that we could see these incredible acts of nature in person.

With these memories in mind, we decided to set out to create a book that was similar to those from our youth...but much, much more. We have integrated our passion for storm chasing, weather photography, and research into a common goal that we know will impact those with desire to understand the weather. We are developing a book, that will not only allow the reader to marvel at the amazing forces of nature, but will explain the dynamics and anatomy of what is occurring in the atmosphere. Utilizing clear overlays, the reader will be able to add or subtract detailed explanations of the meteorological components of the image. Radar and satellite images will give the reader a top to bottom understanding of exactly what is occurring in the atmosphere to create such an amazing sight. "The Anatomy of Severe Weather"" will utilize over 200 high resolution images of severe weather that we have witnessed and will witness in person across the Great Plains. We have a vision of our book being used in classrooms, SKYWARN ™ storm spotter meetings, and by the casual weather enthusiast. Our goal is to traverse the plains during the spring of 2015 collecting just the right images and have all of the components in place to release the book in both hard and electronic copy by December of 2015. This is an ambitious project, and we aim to produce two versions of the book - a softcover version available for a backer level of only $40, and a more deluxe hardcover version that is a museum quality coffee table book, available at the backer level of $100 and above. Both versions will contain all the content, images, and narrative that we hope and believe will ensure they are utilized for years to come, and the hardcover version will also contain transparent overlays (for more on the book itself, scroll down to the section on "How will the book be published?").

Who are we?

Zach Roberts is a business owner, veteran storm chaser and severe weather photographer. Jason Weingart is a veteran storm chaser, professional photographer and lightning expert. Savannah Williams is a veteran storm chaser, severe weather photographer and graphic design expert. Logan Poole is a meteorologist and storm chaser. Together we have vast experience with all aspects of severe weather and look forward to sharing our knowledge with you. You can find us at our websites: Mr Twister & Jason Weingart Photography or Facebook: Zach Roberts, Jason Weingart & Savannah Williams.

What will be in the book?

Over 200 of our Professional high resolution images of tornadoes, lightning, supercell thunderstorms, and much more! The reader will have the ability to add or subtract a clear page overlay that will describe each image in detail.

Detailed explanations of how and why severe weather occurs.

Historical references to past milestone weather events

Storm chasing stories behind the scenes to give you an idea of how capture these images

Bonus section covering project "Franklinstein" by Jason Weingart. The mission of contributing to a greater understanding of lightning, one rocket at a time.

Jason Weingart deploying his 2014 probe near Smith Center, Ks.

During the 2015 storm season, Jason's lightning probes will be fired into prime lightning conditions to collect data in real time. Jason will detail his findings, the challenges he faced, and his contribution to the advancement of lightning research in a special section of "The Anatomy of Severe Weather".

What Type of Images Will Be Used in the Book?

Our goal is to use only images that properly outline the dynamic process that occur during severe weather. Not all images fit this criteria. Part of your donation will allow us to head out in the spring of 2015 with the goal of capturing images specifically with this criteria in mind.

Who is this book for?

Weather Enthusiasts

Photography Enthusiasts

SKYWARN ™ and Storm Spotter groups

K-12 Classrooms

Libraries

Storm Chasers

Anyone who loves the weather

How will your donation be spent?

Developmental Editing: $3,200

Copy Editing: $3,500

Formatting/ Digital Con: $1,200

ISBN, copyright, etc: $150

Graphic Design: $3,000

Marketing/PR: $2,500

Photography Content: $4,000

Franklinstein Build: $3,000

Franklinstein Field Research: $3,500

Printing-both versions: $8,500

Subtotal: $32,700

BALANCE TO BE USED FOR: Kickstarter/Amazon Fees; fulfillment of all other non-book Rewards (postcards, prints, t-shirts, etc.)

How will the book be published?

We had originally intended to keep costs low by utilizing a print on demand publishing format. However, as those of you who have followed our Updates know - we've been able to graduate to a way higher level of printing for the hardcover book, and we are STOKED about this. As a result of the support we have received, we will now be able run the hardcover book on a 6-color Heidelberg press with high-resolution images, thicker and brighter paper stock, using a first-rate binding process, 3mm boards for the cover, and a laminated book jacket wrapped over the top. We can now say for certain that it will be a museum-quality book, and it would likewise qualify as a coffee-table book. The transparent overlays used in the hardcover version will also allow the reader to combine relevant copy to an image the copy describes, adding educational impact. The soft cover book will remain as a print on demand offering, and while it is a more casual product, it will contain all the same content and images as the hard cover version (with the transparent overlay information as well, though not on transparent paper). Any questions on this - hit "Contact Me" on top right of page.

What will we do if we surpass our goal?

We envision producing subsequent editions of "The Anatomy of Severe Weather". As current funding stands we would only cover weather on the great plains of tornado alley. If we were able to surpass our goal we have the dream of documenting weather across the United States and producing a follow up book that covers more than severe weather.

When will the book be published?

We anticipate having the electronic and hard copy available by December of 2015.

How else you can help

We appreciate your contribution to this project and the help does not stop there. We also need your help getting the word out to all your family and friends. Please use the Facebook/LinkedIn/Twitter like buttons to encourage everyone you know to join in our creation!

We appreciate you!

You are the most important piece of this project. Without you and your donations we will not succeed. This fact drives the rewards we have created in the column to the right. Publishing your name in the book will be an honor for us and we truly mean it when we say Thank you! Please do not hesitate to contact us with suggestions,words of encouragement, and/or general questions.

Zach Roberts-Creator,Writer, Editor, Photographer

Jason Weingart-Writer, Editor, Photographer, Lightning Research

Savannah Williams-Graphic Design, Illustrator, Photographer, Lightning Research

Logan Poole-Editor
