Climate change could mean massive ocean dead zones
502
http://www.theverge.com/2015/1/28/7930047/climate-change-could-mean-massive-ocean-dead-zones

The crabs had suffocated, caught by a sudden influx of low-oxygen water. The dead zone has reappeared every year since, expanding to cover an area the size of Rhode Island in 2006. Researchers have long suspected dead zones like Oregon’s are linked to climate change. Something in the system of ocean currents and wind patterns had shifted, creating a deadly new normal, and it had happened suddenly.

A study out today in PLOS One gives an idea of just how widespread — and how sudden — these shifts can be. Researchers reconstructed the state of seawater as the ice sheets melted roughly 10,000-17,000 years ago, a period of climate change with parallels to our own, by using ocean sediment taken from locations between Chile and the Gulf of Alaska. The scientists found evidence of extreme oxygen loss all along the Pacific coast. More alarming, they found that it happened fast — in some cases, in less than 100 years.

"We were definitely struck by the rate, by how fast these changes happen," says Sarah Moffitt, a researcher at the UC Davis Bodega Marine Laboratory and lead author of the paper.

Low-oxygen zones occur naturally in certain parts of the ocean, often some of the most productive for fisheries, as a side effect of nutrient-rich water coming to the surface. In Oregon, for instance, summer winds push warm, oxygen-rich surface water offshore, and cold, fertile, but oxygen-starved water cycles up from the deep to take its place. It’s a process called upwelling, and like rotating compost, it brings a wealth of nutrients to the surface; those nutrients feed phytoplankton, which in turn feed fish and crabs. When the phytoplankton die, they sink and decay, creating areas of low oxygen farther down in the water column. But in recent years, these low-oxygen zones have been getting bigger, more intense, and creeping closer to shore.

"It’s a natural feature of upwelling zones," Moffitt says. "But this investigation showed that it’s extremely responsive to abrupt climate change. The capacity for these zones to expand vertically and geographically is very extreme."
