Climate Change, Net Neutrality Top of Mind for Democrats
66
http://www.sharethis.com/blog/2015/01/29/climate-change-net-neutrality-will-top-mind-democrats-2016/

Climate Change and Net Neutrality Will be Top of Mind for Democrats in 2016 By Vivien Pillet on January 29, 2015

The social web has certainly evolved since Obama won the second term. Social networks have evolved to take on a much more meaningful scope in people’s lives. Voters certainly haven’t been shy about expressing their political opinions on social media, either; there are over 11 million politics-related social signals occurring on social networks every day. You can imagine that candidates are investing considerable amounts of resources into finding effective ways of activating conversations into votes, especially considering the correlation between sharing activity and election outcomes.

In an ongoing effort to better understand the impact of social media on elections, we’ve decided to delve deeper into the sharing habits of the politically inclined. For this report, we’re focusing on the social media habits of 17.8 million registered democrats in our network who frequently share content about politics. Our first finding wasn’t much of a surprise: partisanship extends itself to social media. Users participate most in the conversations that align with their party’s interest. For democrats, that means climate change and net neutrality drive a fair amount of social activity:

This extends itself into their channel behaviors, as well. Although the majority of social activity takes place on Facebook, Democrats were more likely to use Twitter and Reddit than their Republican counterparts. Considering our recent discoveries on the political leanings of major social networks, this doesn’t come as much of a surprise. Priority issues among democrats, such as climate change and net neutrality, tend to be more heavily discussed within channels other than Facebook.

Perhaps most interest has been the evolution of politics conversation in recent months. Seven months ago, net neutrality certainly wasn’t top of mind for voters. With recent developments, however, the issue has come to light and rapidly become the most social topic among democratic voters. The same is true of foreign affairs, driven perhaps by ongoing concerns in the Middle East and Europe. In order to align themselves with engaged voters, candidates may want to consider shifting their policy discussion toward these topics.

For a PDF copy of this study, please email pr@sharethis.com.

Posted in: Industry Trends, Research, social engagement
