Climate: Rapid Iceland uplift linked with ice cap meltdown
100
http://summitcountyvoice.com/2015/01/31/climate-rapid-iceland-uplift-linked-with-ice-cap-meltdown/

Posted on by Bob Berwyn

Some research suggests vanishing ice could trigger volcanoes

Staff Report

FRISCO — Like a baking cake, Iceland is rising up as global warming melts the island’s ice caps and glaciers.

Using detailed data from a network of 62 GPS monitoring sites, scientists showed, for example, that parts of south-central Iceland are moving upward as much as 1.4 inches (35 mm) per year — a speed that surprised the researchers, who linked the changes with global warming.

“What we’re observing is a climatically induced change in the Earth’s surface,” said University of Arizona geosciences professor Richard Bennett. “Iceland is the first place we can say accelerated uplift means accelerated ice mass loss,” Bennett said.

He added there is geological evidence that during the past deglaciation roughly 12,000 years ago, volcanic activity in some regions of Iceland increased thirty-fold. Others have estimated the Icelandic crust’s rebound from warming-induced ice loss could increase the frequency of volcanic eruptions such as the 2010 eruption of Eyjafjallajökull, which had negative economic consequences worldwide.

After years of studying Iceland, Bennett in 2013 noticed one of long-running stations in the center of the country was showing that site was rebounding at an accelerated rate. He wondered about it, so he and his colleagues checked the nearby stations to see if they had recorded the same changes.

“The striking answer was, yes, they all do,” he said. “We wondered what in the world could be causing this?”

The team began systematically analyzing years of signals from the entire network and found the fastest uplift was the region between several large ice caps. The rate of uplift slowed farther from the ice cap region. The findings are detailed in an upcoming issue of Geophysical Research Letters. The scientists said the paper is the first to show the current fast uplift of the Icelandic crust is a result of accelerated melting of the island’s glaciers that coincides with the onset of warming that began about 30 years ago.

Other researchers had been measuring ice loss and observed a notable uptick in the rate of melting since 1995. Temperature records for Iceland, some of which go back to the 1800s, show temperatures increasing since 1980.

“Our research makes the connection between recent accelerated uplift and the accelerated melting of the Icelandic ice caps,” said first author Kathleen Compton, a University of Arizona geosciences doctoral candidate.

Geologists have long known that as glaciers melt and become lighter, the Earth rebounds as the weight of the ice decreases. But whether the current rebound is related to past deglaciation or modern ice loss has been an open question until now, Bennett said.

Some of Iceland’s GPS receivers have been in place since 1995. Bennett, Hreinsdóttir and colleagues had installed 20 GPS receivers in Iceland in 2006 and 2009, thus boosting the coverage of the nation’s geodesy network. In central and southern Iceland, where five of the largest ice caps are located, the receivers are 18 miles (30 km) or less apart on average.

The article “Climate driven vertical acceleration of Icelandic crust measured by CGPS geodesy” by Compton, Bennett and their co-author Sigrun Hreinsdóttir of GNS Science in Avalon, New Zealand, was accepted for publication Jan. 14, 2015, and is soon to be published online. The National Science Foundation and the Icelandic Center for Research funded the research.

Share this: StumbleUpon

Reddit

Twitter

Google

Facebook

Email

Like this: Like Loading... Related

Filed under: climate and weather, Environment, global warming, greenhouse gases Tagged: | climate change, global warming, Iceland, Iceland volcanoes
