Poll: Is climate change denial a path to political death?
161
http://blog.seattlepi.com/seattlepolitics/2015/01/30/poll-is-climate-change-denial-a-path-to-political-death/#4530101=0

Two-thirds of Americans, and nearly half of Republicans, are more likely to vote for candidates who campaign on fighting global warming, according to a new national poll.

The number of Americans who believe climate change is caused, at least in part, by human activities has grown from 72 percent in a 2011 Stanford University poll to 81 percent in the latest survey, conducted this month. The view is shared by 88 percent of Democrats, 83 percent of Independents and 71 percent of Republicans.

The survey of 1,006 adult Americans was conducted January 7-22 by the New York Times, Stanford University and the nonpartisan group Resources for the Future.

It came as Republicans who are climate change deniers were assuming key positions in the new Congress. Some examples:

–Sen. Jim Inhofe, R-Oklahoma, the new chairman of the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee, has described human-caused climate change as “the greatest hoax ever perpetrated on the American people.

–Sen. Lisa Murkowski, R-Alaska, just installed as chair of the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee, is cosponsor of legislation that would take away the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s authority to regulate and limit emissions of carbon into the atmosphere.

–Rep. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, R-Wash., chair of the House Republican Conference, has cosponsored the Energy Tax Prevention Act, which would deny EPA authority to limit greenhouse gases.

Of ex-Vice President Al Gore, who shared a Nobel Peace Prize for his climate advocacy, McMorris Rodger declared: “We believe Al Gore deserves an ‘F’ in science and an ‘A’ in creative writing.” (McMorris Rodgers specializes in partisan sound bites.)

It would appear, from the latest poll, that these people are out of step with the country. Some findings of the Times/Stanford/RFF poll:

–Sixty-seven percent of respondents, including 72 percent of Independents and 48 percent of Republicans, said they would be less likely to vote for a candidate who said that human-caused climate change is (as described by Sen. Inhofe) a hoax.

–Eighty-three percent of Americans, including 86 percent of Independents and 61 percent of Republicans, agreed that if nothing is done to reduce discharges of greenhouse gases, global warming will be a very or somewhat serious problem in years to come.

–Seventy-one percent of Americans expect that they will be personally hurt by climate change, although anticipations vary.

A few Republicans have, from time to time, talked about global warming.

Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., made climate change a theme of his May, 2008, campaign swing through Washington and Oregon. In the fall, however, he dropped climate as an issue, while Republicans at rallies summed up the party’s energy policy with a chant: “Drill, baby, drill.”

Ex-Utah Gov. Jon Huntsman raised the issue in the 2012 New Hampshire primary, but was alone in a Republican field that questioned, denied, and/or ridiculed scientific evidence of human-caused global warming.

Despite the droughts and record heat in his state, Gov. Rick Perry of Texas even charged, without proof, that climate research scientists are faking the evidence.

The standard line, however, has become the line of House Speaker John Boehner: “Listen, I’m not qualified to debate the science over climate change.”

Charging that Democrats are waging a “war on coal,” Boehner has brought to the floor measure after measure to restrict or limit the EPA’s authority to regulate coal dust and other industry-caused particulate matter.

The most powerful climate change deniers in America are likely the billionaire oilmen Charles and David Koch, whose political network plans to spend $889 million during the 2016 election cycle.

Climate issues tend to recede as election day approaches. Indeed, the new poll found that far more Democrats than Independents or Republicans — 63 percent to 40 percent and 18 percent, respectively — feel the issue is extremely or very important to them personally.
