So You Think We're Reducing The Use Of Coal? -- Think Again
2
http://www.forbes.com/sites/jamesconca/2014/10/23/so-you-think-were-reducing-the-use-of-coal-think-again/

If you think we’ve been doing a reasonable job of curbing fossil fuel use in our electricity production you are sadly mistaken. While coal use in America and Europe has leveled, growth in coal use worldwide is increasing dramatically (Figure 1).

And natural gas has kicked into high gear most everywhere (Figure 2).

Renewables have grown rapidly, relative to themselves, but are still extremely small with respect to fossil fuel growth. In fact, just the growth in fossil fuel over the last five years has dwarfed the growth in renewables over the same time period. Nuclear and hydro are level but predicted to grow only moderately in the next few decades (Figure 3). It is interesting to note that the Great Recession had little effect on global energy growth.

While the developed world is switching from coal to natural gas, the developing world sees coal as their savior.

In the developing world, there are 1.6 billion people that have no access to electricity, whatsoever. 2.4 billion people still burn wood and manure as their main source of energy. And 3 billion more people will be born in the next 30 years.

This is a lot of people that will require a lot of energy. Just to survive. To have a reasonable life, they will need at least 3,000 kWhs per person per year. That’s about 20 trillion kWhs per year, a lot more than all the electricity produced in the world today.

That’s 2,000 GenIII nuclear power plants. Or 5,000 coal-fired power plants. Or 20,000 gas-fired power plants. Or 20,000,000 large wind turbines.

Besides costing between $10 and $20 trillion over 30 years, how do you provide this much energy to the developing world that has almost nothing – no infrastructure, no expertise, no resources?

You give them coal.

Just like we did to ourselves 100 years ago. Just like China’s been doing since the 1990s.

Of all energy sources, coal is the easiest to set up. The easiest to transport – by ship, rail and truck. It is straightforward to build a coal-fired power plant. And to operate it.

While it is even easier to build a natural gas-fired power plant, it is not at all easy to support it. Natural gas requires more infrastructure than any other energy source – for transporting the gas in pipelines, liquefying facilities and special terminals; and for storing it, often deep underground in geologic formations like salt caverns. These limitations are slowing even America’s expansion of natural gas.

Nuclear is the most difficult to build in the developing world. In the developing world, large-scale renewables are not effective since there is no baseload to support them, no back-up sources to load-follow the intermittency, and no extensive high-voltage distribution system. Hydro is possible, but is limited geographically and physiographically.

No, coal is the obvious energy source to bring a country’s starving people up into the modern world. After that, they may have the luxury to care about the planet.

Just ask China.
