Men's Boy Cotton T Shirts Leopard Look Upwards Summer Unisex T-shirt Tee Tops
240
http://www.ebay.co.uk/itm/Mens-Boy-Cotton-T-Shirts-Leopard-Look-Upwards-Summer-Unisex-T-shirt-Tee-Tops-/121325616078

About t shirt!

T-Shirt : Men's Boy Cotton T Shirts Leopard Look Upwards Summer Unisex T-shirt Tee Tops Description & Features : • Updated sleeve shape for improved fit

• Cotton/Lycra® rib crew neck with taped neckline for comfort

• Produced using Belcoro® yarn for a softer feel and cleaner printing process

• Fine knit gauge for enhanced printability. Sizes : S M L XL Fitness : Classic fit Weight : White 160gsm, Colours 165 gsm Stuff : 100% Cotton (Ash: 99% Cotton/1% Polyester, Heather Grey: 97% Cotton/3% Polyester) Colors : Please select your size then color combination of either, Black White Grey Navy Red Orange Purple Green Dark Green Blue Sleeves : Half Shirt Brand : Furit of the loom Condition : New



Payment:

We only accept payments via Paypal.

Delivery:

All items are dispatched from our LONDON STORE with express delivery or regular post, guaranteed fast handling and delivery.

All orders will be dispatched no later than 24 hours after payment has been received/confirmed, except weekends, natural causes, & public holiday. Delivery will take between 1-3 days (sometimes takes longer, depending on customer location).

We are more than happy to combine postage for multiple items .

Returns policy:

If you not happy with the item you may return within 14 working days in unworn and in original condition.We will usually refund any money received from you using the same method originally used by you to pay for your purchase.Buyer will pay for return postage. please use recorded postage, so we can track the post.

Leaving Feedback:

Positive feedback is so important to us as it lets us know that our customers are happy with their items. Please leave feedback as soon as you receive the item and so do we.

All items are described to our best ability and are thoroughly inspected prior to dispatch to make sure they are in good quality. Please note do not left us nuetral or negative feedback without contacting us, we will not be able to provide any refund for the item/s you purchased and will block the buyer to protect our reputation. We really appreciate your understanding and support in this matter. richmond_uk ebay Shop







Home

About us

Delivery

Returns

Feedback

Customer Service Categories Mens Clothing

Kids Clothing

Ladies Clothing Hoodies Mens Hoodies T-Shirts / Tops Mens T-Shirts

Kids T-Shirts

Ladies Tops Price Range Price £1 - £4.99

Price £5 - £9.99

Price £10+ Colours / Colors Black

White

Killy Green

Royal Blue Brand : FACORP Details : Updated sleeve shape for improved fit

Produced using Belcoro® yarn for a softer feel and cleaner printing process

Fine knit gauge for enhanced printability. Sizes : Menswear (S M L XL) - Kidswear (Age 2-3, 3-4 , 5-6, 7-8) Fitness : Fit Weight : 160gsm to 265 gsm Colors : Please select your size then color combination of either, Black White Grey Navy Red Orange Purple Green Dark Green Blue Condition : Brand New Print on T-Shirts or Hoodies: The market these days is flooded with the most common type of t-shirts with screen printing . The technique involves the separation of two different colors. Water based inks are used to print in the t-shirts with the help of mesh screens which is used to limit the ink in a particular area of the t-shirt to form a design. Most of the screen printed t-shirts use only limited colors. To have wider color choices process printing technique can be used which involves colors like yellow , black , cyan and magenta inks. There is also a simulated technique which uses black , white , red , green or blue inks. Printing on t-shirts is usually more useful for promoting products. The trend of advertising on t-shirts started in the 70s but since the 90s era, the trend of printing on t-shirts was started by the companies. The companies print the logos of the companies on the t-shirts to promote the consumer products and help to make the product even more popular. Whether it is a beach , a club , college , or chilling out with friends , a t-shirt is the best and comfortable casual outfit . Make the best fashion statement even with the simplest designer t-shirt with the help of a phrase for instance ‘Attitude is contagious, but mine is worth catching’ or ‘Be happy to make others happy’.

Kids Size Chart Sizes 3-4 5-6 7-8 9-11 12-13 Chest to Fit" 22-24 26-28 30 32 34 Actual Chest (cm) 76 81 86 92 97 Actual Length (cm) 45 50 55 60 65 Sizes Tolerance +/- 2.5cm

Mens Size Chart Sizes S M L XL XXL Chest (IN) 34-36 38-40 42-44 46-48 50-52 Waist (IN) 28-30 32-34 36-38 40-42 44-46 Neck (IN) 14-14.5 15-15.5 16-16.5 17-17.5 18-18.5 Sleeve (IN) 33.5-33 33.5-34 34.5-35 35-35.5 35.5-36 Sizes Tolerance +/- 2.5cm * Measure across highest garment 1cm down from armholes ** Measure from hightest point of shoulder to bottom edge of garment Check out my other listings View More... Payment: Paypal payments only.

Delivery: All items are dispatched from our LONDON STORE with express delivery or regular post, guaranteed fast handling and delivery. All orders will be dispatched no later than 24 hours after payment has been received/confirmed, except weekends, natural causes, & public holiday. Delivery will take between 1-3 days (sometimes takes longer, depending on customer location). We are more than happy to combine postage for multiple items .

Returns policy:

If you not happy with the item you may return within 14 working days in unworn and in original condition.We will usually refund any money received from you using the same method originally used by you to pay for your purchase.Buyer will pay for return postage. please use recorded postage, so we can track the post.

Leaving Feedback:

Positive feedback is so important to us as it lets us know that our customers are happy with their items. Please leave feedback as soon as you receive the item and so do we. All items are described to our best ability and are thoroughly inspected prior to dispatch to make sure they are in good quality. Please note do not left us nuetral or negative feedback without contacting us, we will not be able to provide any refund for the item/s you purchased and will block the buyer to protect our reputation. We really appreciate your understanding and support in this matter.

Home

About us

Delivery

Returns

Feedback

Customer Service

RSS

Blog
