Project Drawdown – substantiative solutions to Climate Change
261
https://lauraecpaul.wordpress.com/2015/01/27/project-drawdown-substantiative-solutions-to-climate-change/

In a moment of sincere disappointment and loss of hope, I was blessed to have the rare gift of speaking to an incredible human being, a golden soul that has inspired me for many years: Paul Hawken. His words, compassion, and optimism continue to resonate:

Is climate change happening to you or for you? If it is happening to you – you are a victim, you are an object, you are dis-empowered. But if you embrace it, it is your ally. We need to embrace climate change as a guide to a far better world than we know now. Avoidance of despair is an essential condition in order for humanity to creatively respond to the future we face. The public’s willingness to respond to climate change can shift, if they can see opportunity instead of dread, that a transformation can benefit them individually and collectively. It is not game over…it is game on.

His most recent work includes being project director for the empowering Project Drawdown (a book, open-source database/digital platform, and coalition of individual and organizational change agents). Project Drawdown describes over 100 social and technological solutions that reduce and sequester carbon dioxide emissions. Projections show adoption could result in net green house gases declining on a year to year basis by 2045.

The solutions outlined in Project Drawdown, are existing, researched, and organized according to agency (individuals, communities, buildings, businesses, forests, cities, provinces/states). They include the obvious (renewable energy, LED lighting) as well as the unexpected (girls education, rotational grazing).

Everyone can contribute to the solutions needed. I challenge you to consider getting involved in Project Drawdown by joining the coalition: become a volunteer, apply to be a fellow, assist your institution in participating, give scientific advice, become a partner, or make a donation.

‘Climate change is begging us to dream’ … and dream we will.

**If you enjoyed the content of this post, please consider following my blog, reblogging, and/or sharing on social media (twitter, linkedin, facebook)**

You may also enjoy ‘Interface: Net-Works (making waste beautiful)‘.
