Tell Assembly Members to Build a Better Bill!
323
http://www.shapingfuturewales.org/en/take-action/

Tell Assembly Members to Build a Better Bill!

Tell Assembly Members to Build a Better Bill!

The Welsh Assembly is debating a law to protect people and nature. It’s called the Well-being of Future Generations Bill.

If we get our new law right, we can ensure that decisions made by public bodies in Wales consider how people and nature will be affected all over the world; and that we will take responsibility for our choices. A powerful new law could help tackle poverty, protect the environment and support Welsh language and culture.

The Bill needs to be stronger if it is to make a difference.

Please join our action to ask Assembly Members to support amendments to the Bill which would make it stronger. Your email will be sent to the party spokespeople who will be deciding how to respond to the Bill.

You could also tweet them to ask for their support, using the hashtag #fgbillwales.

They are Antoinette Sandbach (Conservatives) @ASandbachAM, Llyr Huws Gruffydd (Plaid Cymru) @LlyrGruffydd and William Powell (Liberal Democrats) @WilliamPowellAM.

Dear Environment & Sustainability Spokesperson,

I welcome the Well-being of Future Generations Bill.

The Bill presents an amazing opportunity. It could improve quality of life for families across Wales and people all over the world. I’d like to see it strengthened so it makes a real difference.

As the Bill is debated by the Assembly, I’d like you to support amendments to make it better:

Our new law needs a clear definition of sustainable development that reflects the importance of nature and respects environmental limits.

The Bill should cover those decisions made in Wales which affect people and nature overseas —that includes how we spend our money.

The Bill needs to put a general duty on public bodies to help achieve sustainable development in everything they do

The Bill should minimise Wales’ contribution to global climate change by setting targets to reduce greenhouse gases

A strengthened role for the Commissioner, with responsibility to the Assembly and independence from government, will maximize the Bill’s positive impact and create greater trust in this vital role.

Your own comments

Please table and support amendments in line with the Sustainable Development Alliance’s recommendations to pass a new law we can all be proud of. Yours sincerely Your Name (required)

Your Email (required)

Your Address (required)

Your Postcode (required)

Enter the code below





Have a look at our briefing on the Bill, or read our proposals.

Want to do more? Share this action with your friends and followers using these buttons.

Email your Assembly Members or find them on twitter and send them a message.

By sending an email over this system you are agreeing to receive occasional e-mails about this campaign from the Sustainable Development Alliance. We will not pass your details to anyone else and you may unsubscribe from e-mails at any time.
