Decarbonising Australia’s economy by 2050
328
http://greenbyblue.com/decarbonising-australia/

Australia capable of maintaining economic growth at an average of 2.4% per annum up to 2050, whilst reducing carbon-emissions to zero (that’s not a typo), by that same year. This is the conclusion that Climateworks Australia and the Australian National University (ANU) have reached in a report illustrating a pathway to a very low-carbon Australian economy.

This sounds radical given the challenges that Australia presents: it is one of the most energy intensive countries in the world; its energy is almost exclusively produced through fossil fuels; its cities are sprawling and car-centric. On top of these, Australia’s economy is heavily reliant on the extraction of natural resources.

Unsurprisingly, Australia’s climate-sceptic business leaders and politicians have laughed off the report as pure fantasy. How, then, did the authors ensure the findings in the report would be seen as credible and useful?

For Climateworks Australia, it is essential that business, government, and investors be at the forefront of delivering the transition to a low-carbon economy. Actively consulting with these stakeholders during the entire process of drafting the report was therefore a must.

Independent and reliable research, they believe, is key to informing decision-makers on the crucial policy and investment decisions they must make in the coming decade to ensure deep decarbonisation.

To obtain reliable data and information, the right expertise is necessary – in energy efficiency, low carbon electricity, electrification and fuel switching, and reducing non-energy emissions in industry and agriculture. Economic modelling in the Australian report was provided by the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) and the Centre of Policy Studies (COPS) at Victoria University.

The authors also benefited from international expertise. The report is part of the Global Deep Decarbonisation Pathways Project (DDPP). 15 countries are developing pathways (Australia, Brazil, Canada, China, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Japan, Mexico, Russia, South Africa, South Korea, the United Kingdom and the United States).

The report, however, is only one step in a longer process to ensuring the right policies and investments are in place. All key stakeholders will be continue to be engaged to find alternative pathways and enabling factors towards Australia’s transition to a very-low carbon economy.

If we are to seriously tackle climate change, every country must play its role and aim to decarbonise within a similar time frame to Australia.

Does your country have a pathway, a road-map or a strategy to decarbonise? Below are some further examples of reports offering pathways to decarbonisation.



New Climate Economy



Zero Carbon Britain



Low Emission Poland 2050
