Our Changing Climate 2
389
http://www.nature.org/ourinitiatives/regions/northamerica/unitedstates/hawaii/explore/our-changing-climate-2.xml?utm_campaign=social.nature&utm_medium=social&utm_source=facebook&utm_content=1421107280

Our Changing Climate

Tropical storm Iselle left the Puna region of Hawai'i island a quagmire of damaged homes, blocked roads and downed power lines. Photo © KHON TV Hawai'i is showing all the telltale signs of climate change. If we are to reverse its course, we must all work to reduce our carbon footprint.

Story Highlights

Top: bleached coral, Kāne‘ohe Bay, Oahu. Bottom: downed albizia trees, Puna, Hawai'i. Top: Photo © State DLNR; bottom: © UH-Hilo.edu "But more than adapting to climate change, we must reverse its course—and that requires reversing our collective carbon output." Suzanne Case

The Conservancy’s Hawai'i Executive Director

By Suzanne Case

Hardly a day passes when I am not thinking about climate change. And given our recent weather, that’s not surprising. In the past few months, we have survived three hurricane scares and an extended heatwave that set temperature records across the state.

Scientists tell us this is what climate change looks like, and that Hawaiʻi is exhibiting all the telltale signs: higher air and ocean temperatures, decreasing rainfall, more extreme weather.

A 2014 report from the University of Hawaiʻi Sea Grant Program notes that the rate of air-warming in the islands has quadrupled over the past 40 years, and sea surface temperatures are rising. Meanwhile, the northeasterly tradewinds have decreased, as has rainfall over the past 30 years.

This past September was the second-hottest in Hawaiʻi since the 1940s. According to officials at the State Department of Land and Natural Resources, underwater temperatures reached as high as 86 degrees (a maximum of 83 degrees is normal), bleaching already stressed coral reefs statewide.

"Bleaching” refers to the white appearance of corals when, with temperature stress, corals expel the zooxanthellae or algae which gives them color and food. Some corals recover; some die. In Kāneʻohe Bay, where the Conservancy is working, 75 percent of the dominant coral species surveyed were either partially or completely bleached.

As bad as the recent weather has been, it could have been worse. All three hurricanes devolved into tropical storms, and only the first, Iselle, caused significant damage, hitting the Puna region of Hawaiʻi Island hard.

In its aftermath, a widespread invasive species—albizia— a beautiful but brittle umbrella-like tree that topples easily in high winds, was fingered as the primary culprit for leaving Puna a quagmire of damaged houses, blocked roads and downed power lines.

So what’s the take home message from all this? For me it’s two-fold. One, maintaining healthy and resilient native ecosystems is our best defense against flood and drought and other severe weather. Having evolved here and adapted to the climate, they provide the best chance for a stable environment.

But more than adapting to climate change, we must reverse its course—and that requires reversing our collective carbon output. Protecting forests from destruction and reforesting pulls carbon out of the atmosphere for storage in trees, where it belongs.

Reducing our carbon use reduces our carbon footprint. Back in 2009, The Nature Conservancy installed solar panels on the roof of our Honolulu office and became the first existing building in Honolulu to be LEED certified. Our office and baseyard on Molokaʻi are powered nearly 100% by the sun. Now, after having raised more than $1 million, we are poised to install low-power equipment, solar panels and wind power generation to create a fossil-fuel free Palmyra Atoll, the spectacular marine wilderness area 1,000 miles of Hawai‘i where we have built an international research station.

As a conservation leader, I take the issue of climate change very seriously, and personally do everything I can to reduce my own carbon footprint. I would encourage you to do the same, whether that means buying an electric, hybrid or biodiesel car, installing photovoltaic panels to power your home, or planting a tree.

Through our own personal actions, each of us can do our part to minimize the impact of climate change. A sustainable future for Hawai‘i and our entire planet depends on it.

Suzanne Case is the Conservancy's Hawai'i Executive Director
