Bering Sea researchers talk climate change
394
http://www.thebristolbaytimes.com/article/1505bering_sea_researchers_talk_climate_change

Bering Sea researchers talk climate change

Scientists at the Alaska Marine Science Symposium in Anchorage last week devoted a full day of presentations to Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands research.

Several researchers added to the ongoing conversation on climate change, and topics ranged from the overwintering of Bristol Bay sockeye salmon to Beringian seabirds and the changing marine food web.

While many residents of Bristol Bay and the Aleutians are already savvy about climate change, these new studies show that there is still room for a multi-disciplinary discussion.

The marine science symposium is one of the largest scientific conferences in Alaska and brings together a diverse array of ongoing research in Alaskan waters. A sampling of the presentations covering climate change in the Bering Sea offers residents another perspective on the region's dynamic ecosystems.

An early warning system

Five hundred miles from the western Aleutian island of Atka, Dr. Douglas Causey of the University of Alaska Anchorage has been studying seabirds. These birds — from auklets to cormorants to albatross — feed at every level of the food web, making them an indicator species of the overall condition of the marine food web.

Causey examined feather and blood samples for naturally occurring isotopes associated with food sources. These isotopes allowed him to estimate both what the birds are eating and the scope of the food web.

Causey found that in the last five years, the types of food the seabirds eat have become more diverse, with marked change in the proportion of fish in their diets. As the availability of food changes, the food web will become more variable.

As variation in food sources grows larger, the ecosystem becomes unstable. This sort of variability is one of the anticipated responses to climate change. If ocean surface temperatures continue to rise - as predicted - ecosystems in the Bering Sea may continue to destabilize.

Though Causey's research is confined to a remote section of the far western Aleutians, everyone in the region could be affected by the increased variability he is seeing.

The flow of predominant currents in the Bering Sea indicate that these trends may become more evident in Bristol Bay in future years.

"It's an early warning signal for what could be coming," Causey said.

Instability in the ecosystem could affect catch limits, opening dates, and length of season for fisheries, Causey said.

The good news, according to Causey, is that there is a multitude of research already being done in regions that directly affect fishermen.

Overwinter survival

Juvenile sockeye salmon enter the saltwater of Bristol Bay in May and June. They generally stay south of Nunivak Island during the summer, and then move south of the Aleutian islands in the fall and winter. The next summer, they will return to Bristol Bay. The fish tend to travel farther north in warmer years.

By monitoring the size, diet, and energy density — or fitness — of juvenile sockeye over the last decade, scientists from the ecosystem monitoring and assessment program at the National Marine Fisheries Service have been able to assess the affect of climate change on juvenile salmon survival rates.

The juvenile salmon must accumulate fat in the summer in order to survive the winter, and scientists observed that the sockeye diet changed according to yearly weather patterns: in colder years, the fish ate fattier food, like krill, while in warmer years they consumed less fatty foods.

The warming trend in Bristol Bay waters is likely to reduce the fat content of fish and may lower their odds of survival in winter, scientists concluded.

"However, salmon are known to adapt to changing environments," said fisheries research biologist Ellen Yasumiishi.

Warmer water also impacts the quality and quantity of prey species. Lower energy levels in prey will affect the fitness level of the juvenile sockeye and may also decrease survival rates.

Continued monitoring will help scientists understand how the Bristol Bay sockeye population will adapt to warming trends.

An interdisciplinary steering committee

The Aleutian and Bering Sea Islands Landscape Conservation Cooperative (ABSI LCC), together with the Alaska Ocean Observing System and the Alaska Climate Science Center reported preliminary findings from the Aleutian and Bering climate vulnerability assessment, launched at last year's marine science symposium.

The assessment brought together experts from a wide variety of scientific disciplines with tribal leaders, natural resource managers, residents, and stakeholders to identify the top information priorities of each entity within the broad expanse of climate change data.

Around 28 scientists split into five main research groups: mammals, seabirds, human dimensions, fisheries, and terrestrial vegetation. Each group then recommended four to eight high priority information needs.

Recommendations presented last week included further inquiry into climate thresholds for parasites or pathogens (such as paralytic shellfish poisoning, or PSP), and a more accurate understanding of projected changes in the food web and how they will affect key species.

These recommendations are meant to facilitate the use of public funding for research projects that are essential to advancing the knowledge about climate change in the Bering Sea region. Once these priorities are established, public organizations can choose to fund specific inquiries.

Scientists met with residents of Unalaska in September to share information and discuss local concerns about climate change. What residents said resonated with some of the scientists' priorities, said Aaron Poe, science coordinator at ABSI LCC. Residents also added their own concerns.

Among these concerns were the relationship between climate change and biomass extracted from the ocean through fishing, changes in sea ice and increase of shipping traffic in the region, and the potential of changes in precipitation and to reactivate contaminated sites.

Forty-four percent of Unalaska residents present at the meeting strongly agreed that they had seen changes in the local environment that seemed to go beyond the normal range, and 48 percent responded that they had definitely noticed a decrease in the amount of commercial fishing resources.

Studies that bring together multiple scientific disciplines with local, state, and federal leadership are becoming more common.

U.S. Fish and Wildlife began designating conservation cooperatives in 2010. There are now 22 of them operating in North America. The LCC system is designed to share data across judiciary and political boundaries and to address the information needs of all involved partners.

"With an issue like climate change that literally affects every part of the system, the best way to address it is to get these people working together," Poe said.

ABSI LCC will release the final report from the Aleutian and Bering climate vulnerability assessment in May.
