Can climate change drive political change?
438
http://www.dailydemocrat.com/editorials/ci_27425617/can-climate-change-drive-political-change

What if the government charged you a gas tax, but instead of keeping the money, refunded all of it equally to American households?

That, in a nutshell, is the proposal of the Citizen's Climate Lobby, a grassroots group working nationwide to fight climate change.

A similar idea has been advocated by ExxonMobil, the world's largest oil company.

The fact that citizen environmentalists and policy analysts at ExxonMobil are in the same corner on this issue provides a way forward for Republicans and Democrats in Congress to enact bipartisan legislation.

It may be a way for members of Congress to start working together for a change, as advocated in a recent Daily Democrat editorial.

If, like ExxonMobil, you are highly concerned about climate risks, you are not alone.

You may have doubtless heard the warnings from the world scientific community, including the Union of the Atomic Scientists, who recently cited climate change as one of the reasons for moving the "Doomsday Clock" two minutes closer to midnight.

Almost every day we read about disappearing glaciers, rising sea level, radical and severe weather patterns, ocean acidification, coming mass extinctions, and other threats.

For the business community, "climate risk" also involves the uncertainties created by even more layers of government regulations if global warming can't be stopped.

Advertisement

Even after all of this is taken into consideration, the issue for many Americans comes down to simple social justice — the growing awareness that we have a moral obligation to protect the world into which we were born, for the benefit of our children, their children, and generations to come.

The good news is that something can be done about climate change that will harness the power of the free market, reduce the need for increasingly burdensome governmental regulations, and stimulate the economy by refunding money back into the pockets of American consumers.

As noted by New York Times columnist David Brooks following President Obama's state of the union speech, there is a growing consensus among pro-business conservatives that putting a price on carbon through a simple, transparent, revenue-neutral tax is an idea whose time has come.

In 2014, a bipartisan coalition of U.S. economists, including George W. Bush administration Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson, released a report titled Risky Business: The Economic Risks of Climate Change in the United States.

The report focuses on "damage to coastal property and infrastructure from rising sea levels and increased storm surge, climate-driven changes in agricultural production and energy demand, and the impact of higher temperatures on labor productivity and public health."

Here is just a small sample: "If we continue on our current path, by 2050 between $66 billion and $106 billion worth of existing coastal property will likely be below sea level nationwide, with $238 billion to $507 billion worth of property below sea level by 2100."

Conservative leaders including Paulson and Reagan administration Secretary of State George Shultz now support a revenue-neutral carbon tax.

Why? Because it would harness the power of the free market to gradually reduce the consumption of fossil fuels, reduce CO2 emissions, and help accelerate cleaner energy solutions, while avoiding layers of complex regulations.

ExxonMobil seems to agree:

"When governments are considering policy options, ExxonMobil advocates an approach that ensures a uniform and predictable cost of carbon; allows market prices to drive solutions; maximizes transparency to stakeholders; reduces administrative complexity; promotes global participation; and is easily adjusted to future developments in climate science and policy impacts.

"We continue to believe a revenue-neutral carbon tax is better able to accommodate these key criteria than alternatives such as cap-and-trade."

The other half of the equation is how to make the tax "revenue-neutral." For the Citizens Climate Lobby, this hinges on returning all fees collected to the American people, every month, on a co-equal basis.

Some may claim that any kind of new tax is a political non-starter in Washington. But as former secretary of State Shultz explains, "It's not a tax if the government doesn't keep the money."

Obviously, under such a plan, the smaller your carbon footprint, the more you would benefit. Putting money back into people's pockets would also stimulate the economy, which is one of the findings of a recent study by Regional Economic Models, Inc.

The REMI analysts examined a carbon tax starting at $10 per ton of CO2, rising $10 per ton each year.

After 20 years, REMI analysts predict that CO2 emissions would be reduced 50 percent, with 2.8 million new jobs added to the economy.

The job growth comes from recycling all the revenue back into the pockets of people who are likely to spend the money on goods and services. That's good news for the middle class.

With all the current talk about bipartisanship in our nation's capital, we need a Republican and a Democrat in Congress to step forward together and sponsor a bill.

Can climate change drive political change in Washington?

Republicans and Democrats, environmentalists and oil companies seem to think so. Congressman Garamendi would be an excellent choice to help us end to the stalemate.

Mark Aulman is a volunteer member of the Yolo Citizens Climate Lobby (www.yoloccl.org), a non-profit, grassroots advocacy organization focused on national policies to address climate change.
