Engage Your Business: Fight Climate Change
440
http://www.rainforest-alliance.org/climate/

Whether you manage natural resources directly or source products and services from suppliers that do, you can increase efficiency and resiliency throughout your supply chains by adopting sustainable, climate-smart practices. Here are some practical reasons to be proactive:

Improve your performance . The actions that drag down a company’s environmental and social performance—unsustainable land management, poor treatment of workers, excessive water and energy use—are the same practices that create waste, inefficiencies and conflict. A climate-smart business is one that’s efficient and well managed.

. The actions that drag down a company’s environmental and social performance—unsustainable land management, poor treatment of workers, excessive water and energy use—are the same practices that create waste, inefficiencies and conflict. A climate-smart business is one that’s efficient and well managed. Strengthen and secure your supply chains. By supporting suppliers that engage in climate-smart practices and can identify, mitigate and adapt to climate risks, your company will better secure its own long-term sustainability, resilience and access to quality materials. In a survey conducted by the Carbon Disclosure Project, 72 percent of companies identified a current or future risk related to climate change; yet they also reported that the very act of collaborating with others to combat the problem improved their chances of financial success. Companies that engaged with suppliers, consumers and other partners to reduce emissions were more than twice as likely to see a financial return on their investment 1 .

By supporting suppliers that engage in climate-smart practices and can identify, mitigate and adapt to climate risks, your company will better secure its own long-term sustainability, resilience and access to quality materials. In a survey conducted by the Carbon Disclosure Project, 72 percent of companies identified a current or future risk related to climate change; yet they also reported that the very act of collaborating with others to combat the problem improved their chances of financial success. Companies that engaged with suppliers, consumers and other partners to reduce emissions were more than twice as likely to see a financial return on their investment . Protect and enhance your reputation. In a survey of global consumers, 90 percent said they would boycott a company’s products/services upon learning it behaved irresponsibly, and 87 percent were “very likely” to consider a company’s social and environmental commitment before deciding what to buy and where to shop 2 . In a separate study, 72 percent of consumers said they would recommend a brand that supports a good cause over one that doesn’t 3 .

In a survey of global consumers, 90 percent said they would boycott a company’s products/services upon learning it behaved irresponsibly, and 87 percent were “very likely” to consider a company’s social and environmental commitment before deciding what to buy and where to shop . In a separate study, 72 percent of consumers said they would recommend a brand that supports a good cause over one that doesn’t . Add value to your brand . An impressive 90 percent of global consumers want companies to go beyond the minimum standards required by law to operate responsibly and address social and environmental issues 4 . In a survey of companies proactively managing their climate risks, 85 percent said that consumer behavior was already changing or would do so within one to five years, and 56 percent said that consumers were becoming more receptive to low-carbon products and services 5 .

. An impressive 90 percent of global consumers want companies to go beyond the minimum standards required by law to operate responsibly and address social and environmental issues . In a survey of companies proactively managing their climate risks, 85 percent said that consumer behavior was already changing or would do so within one to five years, and 56 percent said that consumers were becoming more receptive to low-carbon products and services . Become an industry leader. As climate change becomes an ever-greater challenge, government and businesses will be called upon to develop regulations, standards and strategies. By proactively implementing climate-smart practices, you can position your business as a sustainability leader, shape the dialogue around these practices and be better prepared to implement the requirements and standards that may be imposed in the future by governments and industry.

How the Rainforest Alliance Supports Businesses

The Rainforest Alliance provides technical assistance and guidance to businesses that want to invest in credible carbon projects, develop their own projects, reduce carbon emissions within their supply chains and source raw materi­als from climate-smart farms. We can help you:

Apply for Rainforest Alliance certification or verification . By complying with the environmental, social and economic criteria required for certification and/or verification, you’ll improve the way you manage your farm, forestry enterprise or tourism business, reduce your carbon footprint and demonstrate your sustainability commitment to your customers and other important audiences.

. By complying with the environmental, social and economic criteria required for certification and/or verification, you’ll improve the way you manage your farm, forestry enterprise or tourism business, reduce your carbon footprint and demonstrate your sustainability commitment to your customers and other important audiences. Source from climate-smart farms . Strengthen your supply chain by connecting with Rainforest Alliance Certified™ suppliers—particularly farms that have been verified against the additional criteria of the Sustainable Agriculture Network Climate Module.

. Strengthen your supply chain by connecting with Rainforest Alliance Certified™ suppliers—particularly farms that have been verified against the additional criteria of the Sustainable Agriculture Network Climate Module. Develop forest carbon projects . We can assist you in designing and implementing agroforestry, REDD+ and other carbon projects that reduce deforestation, enhance carbon stocks on farms, support the sustainable management of forests and critical ecosystems, and have the potential to generate income through carbon financing.

. We can assist you in designing and implementing agroforestry, REDD+ and other carbon projects that reduce deforestation, enhance carbon stocks on farms, support the sustainable management of forests and critical ecosystems, and have the potential to generate income through carbon financing. Support a carbon project . Even if your business doesn’t directly manage natural resources, you can still make a difference by purchasing carbon offsets from credible projects that have earned Rainforest Alliance verification for their emissions reductions.

. Even if your business doesn’t directly manage natural resources, you can still make a difference by purchasing carbon offsets from credible projects that have earned Rainforest Alliance verification for their emissions reductions. Assess and reduce climate risks . We can work with you to assess climate vulnerability at the point of origin of the materials you source, as well as identify opportunities to reduce risk and build resilience to climate change into your supply chain.

. We can work with you to assess climate vulnerability at the point of origin of the materials you source, as well as identify opportunities to reduce risk and build resilience to climate change into your supply chain. Establish zero-deforestation supply chains. We’ll evaluate deforestation risks within your supply chain and work together to create a customized action plan that integrates certification, REDD+ and other conservation approaches; transitions your sourcing policies towards zero-deforestation; and increases your productivity and resiliency.

For inquiries about our climate work, please email climate@ra.org
