Amazing Photography Collective Brings Images of Climate Change to the World
453
http://www.onegreenplanet.org/news/photography-collective-brings-images-of-climate-change-to-the-world/

While we hear a lot of talk about climate change and the different impacts that it will have on the planet, we don’t often get to see these effects. When we hear that sea levels are rising and it causing entire nations to abandon their homes and relocate, we might be sympathetic, but if we’re not living this sort of tragedy, we’re less likely to feel compelled to learn more or make a change in our own lives.

In the U.S. we are largely shielded from climate disasters like this – not entirely, but for the most part – but our society plays a huge role in driving climate change. It is this sort of disconnect that makes us continue to spew greenhouse gases into the atmosphere and produce and consume livestock on an unprecedented scale, without thinking twice.

In an effort to close this gap in thinking, photographer James Whitlow Delano launched “Everydayclimatechange,” on Instagram. This photo project features the work of photographers from five continents who are submitting photos that act as evidence that climate change is real, and happening right now.

A farmer in Guatemala stands by his cornfield that dried up due to an extended dry season.

Deforestation in Indonesia caused by paper pulp production.

Little girl sits in the middle of a water reserve that should be filled with meltwater from the Andes.

Little boy walks to school in Kiribati. This is one of the most affected countries due to sea level rise.

Young man sits in his destroyed village that was destroyed by Cyclone Nargis in Myanmar.

An unattended oil well sparks massive inferno in the Niger Delta. In a few days it turned into a full-scale environmental disaster.

This photo was taken in what used to be Mexico’s biggest lake.

Man grips onto a rescue boat in Pakistan after worst flood in the past 80 years.

To see more and to follow the progress of this project, follow EveryDayClimateChange on Instagram.

All image source: EveryDayClimateChange/Instagram
