Colorado fracking ban scorecard: 3 ruled illegal, 2 remain
461
http://www.bizjournals.com/denver/blog/earth_to_power/2014/08/colorado-fracking-ban-roundup-shows-3-ruled.html

Enlarge Photo Kathleen Lavine | Denver Business Journal

Cathy Proctor Reporter- Denver Business Journal Email | Facebook | Twitter

Three out of five Front Range cities' bans on hydraulic fracturing in the last few years have been struck down by district court judges in recent weeks, and two others still stand.

Both Boulder and Broomfield still have fracking bans in place.

The city of Lafayette’s ban, which was approved by voters in November 2013, was struck down Wednesday by Boulder District Court Judge D.D. Mallard.

She’s the same judge that in late July who ruled the city of Longmont’s ban on fracking, approved by voters in 2012, also violated state law.

Mallard stayed her Longmont ruling to allow city officials time to file an appeal. The Longmont City Council on Tuesday unanimously voted to appeal the ruling.

Another judge, Larimer County District Judge Gregory Lammons, struck down Fort Collins’ voter-approved ban on fracking in early August.

Both judges ruled that, in essence, local governments couldn’t ban fracking because it’s a critical technology used by the energy industry to produce oil and natural gas, and it's the state that oversees oil and gas operations.

Mallard, in her ruling Wednesday regarding the Lafayette ban, wrote that “Lafayette does not have the authority, in a matter of mixed state and local concern, to negate the authority of the state. It does not have the authority to prohibit what the state authorizes and permits.”

The three cities had been sued by the Colorado Oil and Gas Association (COGA), an industry trade group.

After the Lafayette ruling, Tisha Schuller, COGA’s president and CEO, said she hoped Mallard’s ruling “ends the activist effort to pass illegal bans against energy development.”

Cathy Proctor covers energy, the environment and transportation for the Denver Business Journal and edits the weekly "Energy Inc." newsletter. Phone: 303-803-9233. Subscribe to the Energy Inc. newsletter
