Oil is an Economic Activity
467
https://t.co/S09JNLvzrx

Oil is an economic activity. By that I mean that it is far more than a commodity and is linked in a fundamental way to global economic activity as a whole. This means that what happens to oil supply and demand will exert a large effect on the overall economy until oil substitutes can be found and implemented on a sufficient scale. This substitution could take a decade or more, and thus the effects of volatile oil prices will have a dominant influence for some time to come.

This paper began as an attempt to understand the current fall in the price of oil and what it might mean for renewable fuels. Digging beyond the obvious short-term benefits to oil consumers, it soon became apparent that the linkage between oil consumption and the global economy was both stronger than I had previously believed, and thus more dangerous in terms of economic growth and stability. Reading Gail Tverberg and Jeff Rubin (see references) first brought these issues to my attention.

The importance of oil is not new. We take it for granted every time we fill up, take an airplane, or less obviously every time we buy groceries or any type of packaged goods. What is new is that oil supply and demand cannot remain in the same affordable relationship that they have in the past. Overall oil demand is gradually exceeding the production of affordable oil which has heretofore kept the oil markets in relative balance, with the help of major oil producers such as OPEC. It is in everyone’s interest to moderate the inevitable increase in the price of oil, so that economic growth can proceed and justify the production of more oil.

While it may seem counterintuitive, or even silly, to highlight the future higher cost of oil at a time when oil prices are falling rapidly, the current falling prices are setting up a situation in which oil prices will rise again, but at some point with an even greater mismatch between demand and affordable supply. At that point, oil-dependent activities, e.g. transportation, must decline or else consume an increasing proportion of GDP.

The most obvious effects of lower oil prices are 1) an increase in oil consumption, and 2) a decrease in oil production. Cheaper oil encourages consumers to buy more cars, drive more, fly more, and buy more imported goods transported with cheap oil. At the same time, it has a corrosive and, at the margin, devastating effect on oil production. Simply put, the production cost of most “new” oil, e.g. offshore, tar sands, fracking, is higher than the traditional cost of “old” oil, e.g. Saudi fields. All oil fields experience a steady decline in production once opened, and therefore even the “old” oil becomes more expensive to produce over time. Today, as oil prices drop below $50 per barrel, most OPEC countries have a break-even production price of around $100 per barrel.

As the headline says, oil is an economic activity. Too-high oil prices, i.e. > $100/bbl can be temporarily compensated by quantitative easing and near-zero interest rates. From an economic (though not environmental) view, this has the beneficial effect of encouraging marginal oil projects, such as the tar sands and fracking, leading to an increase in oil production and lower oil prices. This is what we are seeing today.

Oil production is a capital intensive business. All producers must borrow and eventually pay back the capital needed to finance new oil wells in ever newer locations, or to stimulate further production in old wells by pumping in seawater, etc. National producers like Saudi Arabia have the financial reserves to survive a year or two of lower oil prices, in the hope of driving out less financially stable producers with higher production costs. The linkage between capital debt and oil production exposes other sectors of the economy, e.g. financials, to the distress of producing oil at $100 per barrel and having to sell it at $50 per barrel. Clearly something has to give.

Euan Mearns has written an interesting analysis on Oil Price Scenarios for 2015 and 2016 (see references), in which he presents three scenarios of the near-future interaction between global oil price and demand. Two of the (more likely) scenarios assume that the outcome will be determined by market forces without the traditional help from OPEC this time. Of interest to this reader, all the scenarios end in a year or two at the same endpoint, with oil at around $100 per barrel. What is different about them is that the market scenarios get there in part by the loss of 1-2 million barrels per day of capacity, i.e. the destruction of oil production capacity, coupled with an increase in oil demand. While 1-2 Mbpd is a small fraction of the current supply of 94 Mbpd, the analyses show the marked effect on oil prices of even 1-2 Mbpd shifts in supply and demand.

What are we to make of this? Two-fold changes in the price of a commodity centrally linked to the transportation of people and goods, and further linked to the production of other commodities, e.g. food, metals, plastics, are bound to have a bad effect on economic growth and stability. The financial crisis of 2008-2010 was notably characterized by a wild oscillation of oil price up to $147 per barrel then down to $32/bbl. Could we now be seeing a similar, inverse oscillation in which the leading edge is a sharp decrease, rather than an increase in the price of oil? It seems likely that the curve will return to some kind of trend of rising demand, with slowly increasing energy prices if we remain dependent on oil.

While this post is primarily about the economic effects of low oil prices, we cannot ignore the longer term effects of continuing to burn fossil fuels including oil. A recent paper in Nature concludes that in order to limit global warming to 2 °C, a third of oil reserves and half of natural gas reserves should be left in the ground. This calls into question the continued investment in exploration and production for oil which will probably never be used, if substitutes can be developed in time. The current miniscule efforts by governments and private industry, and the tiny investments relative to oil production, suggest a large financial opportunity to begin solving the problems of nonfossil substitutes for oil.

References

McGlade, C. and Ekins, P. (2015) The geographical distribution of fossil fuels unused when limiting global warming to 2 °C. Nature 517:187-190 (08 January 2015).

Mearns, E. (2014) Oil Price Scenarios for 2015 and 2016. oilprice.com (17 December 2014).

Rubin, J. (2009) Why Your World Is About To Get A Whole Lot Smaller: Oil and The End of Globalization. Random House, New York.

Tverberg, G. (2015) Oil and the Economy: Where are We Headed in 2015-2016? Our Finite World (06 January 2015).
