The Carbon Footprint of the Keystone XL — BLUEdot register
506
http://www.bluedotregister.org/carbon-copy/2015/1/11/a-long-pipeline-and-a-big-foot-the-carbon-footprint-of-the-keystone-xl?utm_content=buffer8d63b&utm_medium=social&utm_source=twitter.com&utm_campaign=buffer

With the US Senate working towards a vote on the Keystone XL pipeline and President Obama’s January 6th press release indicating he would veto a Keystone bill if it reaches his desk, there is little chance you have not heard of the pipeline. The proposed Keystone XL is intended to deliver Canadian Tar Sands across the United States to port towns in the Golf of Mexico. As we’ve been watching the debate unfold over the last number of months we have been wondering what, exactly, is the carbon footprint that pipeline would be responsible for. We were shocked and think you might be as well .

What Are Tar Sands?

They are deposits of “extra-heavy” oil bitumen – a semisolid hydrocarbon. Tar sand bitumen is so dense that at 52 degrees Fahrenheit it is “as hard as a hockey puck” according to the Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers. So how does one get a hockey puck to travel through a pipe you may ask? By heating it to its melting point, or by diluting the bitumen creating a ‘synthetic crude’ with enough viscosity to ooze its way along .

Tar sands are known to be ‘dirtier’ than conventional crude oil. A study by the US Congressional Research Service titled Canadian Oil Sands: Life-Cycle Assessments of Greenhouse Gas Emissions explored the life-cycle greenhouse gas emissions associated with tar sands. The study points out that the extraction and refinement process is so intensive that emissions associated with its production (the embodied greenhouse gas of the product) are approximately twice that of conventional crude production. When you actually get the gas into your car, its emissions associated with powering your vehicle will be roughly the same as conventionally derived gasoline. When you factor together the Tar Sands production emissions with the operational emissions at the user end, the report finds that the total carbon footprint of Tar Sand derived gasoline is 117% that of conventional .

Some Facts and Figures About American Oil Pipelines

Oil is transported throughout the United States in four primary ways: truck, rail, boat, and pipeline. Currently there is a network of more than 190,000 miles of liquid petroleum pipelines, nearly 320,000 miles of gas transmission pipelines, and more than 2.4 million miles of gas distribution pipelines on or under American soil . (Pipeline101)

When viewed from the perspective of environmental safety, transportation of crude oil via pipeline is second least safe of the big four options. Between 2002 and 2007 alone, there were 110 million barrels of crude oil spilled from American pipelines, over 3 times that of that from rail transport. Over the period 1996-2007, truck and pipeline transport consistently spill more crude oil per ton-mile than rail or boat transport .
