dennis baker
185
https://t.co/xDUffW7ArI

#BigIdeas2015

another issue my solution eliminates.



Antibiotic Resistant Superbugs may Claim 10 Million Lives ... beforeitsnews.com/.../ antibiotic - resistant -superbugs-may-claim-10-millio...

Dec 15, 2014 - Economist and head of the Review on Antimicrobial Resistance , Jim ... economy being hit by up to 100 trillion US dollars (£63.6 trillion) by 2050 ...

Economist and head of the Review on , Jim ... economy being hit by up to US dollars (£63.6 trillion) by 2050 ... www.scientificamerican.com › Health › Environmental Health News

Apr 16, 2009 - Some bacteria at sewage treatment plants are becoming resistant to ... Some bacteria, commonly called " superbugs ," are so tough that no ...

Some bacteria at plants are becoming resistant to ... Some bacteria, commonly called " ," are so tough that no ...

EPA-HQ-OAR-2013-0602

Comment on the Clean Power Plan Proposed Rule



It would appear that President Obama has done his homework on this issue, by all I have heard Implementation of the Montreal Protocol had extensive economic benefits, including USA exporting alternative technology.



Proof Positive that we can rally together, when a confronting a common threat, that potentially reduces us all, to our Lowest Common Denominator : Survival of the Species.

The Montreal Protocol exemplify's the Highest Common Denominator :

Survival of the Entire Species.



The President grasps the interactive by-products of increased health issues, the U.N. is just catching on, to that reality Nexus2015.

My proposed solution addresses the increased health issues that are interactive by-products of present sewage disposal, issues.



President Obama said it "40 % of carbon emissions" come from Power Plants.

The IPCC suggests a Minimum 40 % Global Reduction of Carbon Emissions is required to address Climate Change.



The EPA is uniquely positioned to exemplify s the Highest Common Denominator

1) Follow the Presidents directives, and create the demand for innovation.

2) Maximize Economic benefits by exporting the Alternative Technology Globally.

3) Expediting a 40 % Global Reduction of Carbon Emissions.



My suggested Alternative Technology

Human Excrement + Nuclear Waste = Hydrogen



1) The Nuclear Waste exists "right now" today!

2) The Excrement is renewable daily.

3) Radiolysis does not require extreme temperatures,

Eliminating the possibility of Meltdown, Peoples greatest Nuclear Fear!

4) Nuclear Waste and Human Excrement need never come in direct Physical contact.

Eliminating the Possibility of Nuclear Proliferation. Peoples secondary Nuclear Fear.

5) Hydrogen can be burned on Radiolysis Site to generate electricity.

Eliminating Hydrogen transportation infrastructure (pipelines)

6) Water created in the Hydrogen Exhaust could replenish aquifers.



All levels of the USA Military Industrial Complex including the Department of Defense have

expressed significant security concerns associated with continued excessive carbon emissions.

Indicating a mobilization of forces similar to a war effort is required to calm

Military Security Concerns and Issues through the expedited implementation of alternative technologies.

I support President Barack Obama 140% on this issue.



Dennis Baker

106-998 Creston Avenue

Penticton BC Canada

V2A1P9

250-462-9574
