State Dept. to Disney: Use “Frozen” to teach kids about climate change
238
http://blog.sfgate.com/hottopics/2015/01/23/state-dept-to-disney-use-frozen-to-teach-kids-about-climate-change/



Olaf explains to Anna and Kristoff why climate change is still a real threat even if it feels really cold outside right now

2014 was, according to NOAA and NASA, the warmest year on record for the entire world. Locally, it was also the hottest year in California’s history. The world’s climate is changing, at least according to science and data.

2014 was also the year of Frozen, Disney’s animated musical blockbuster about two sisters and a snowman (more or less), amassing over $1.2 billion in worldwide box office receipts and billions more from countless sing-a-long showings, DVD sales, and merchandise since its November 2013 release.

And now, in 2015, we’re learning where these two seemingly disparate facts intersect: the State Department’s Admiral Robert Papp, who heads up everything about the Arctic, recently spoke at the Arctic Frontiers conference in Norway where he unveiled the fact that he had approached Disney about creating a spin-off cartoon with the characters from Frozen to teach kids about climate change. From Responding To Climate Change:

“I went to Disney and I had the opportunity to speak to an executive there,” said Papp, speaking at the Arctic Frontiers conference in Tromsø, Norway. “In explaining why we wanted Disney’s assistance on this, I said, ‘You’ve taught an entire generation about the Arctic. Unfortunately the Arctic that you’ve taught them about is a fantasy kingdom in Norway, where everything is nice.’ “And I said what we really need to do is educate the American youth about the plight of the polar bear, about the falling tundra, about Alaskan villages that run the risk of falling into the sea because of the lack of sea ice protecting their shores.”

Papp, it seems, also has a lot in common with most parents and grandparents of children under the age of 12: he’s seen Frozen way too many times thanks to his granddaughters. Papp added that Disney wasn’t on board with the idea given that everything about climate change is kind of a downer, but insisted, “We’re regrouping on our storyline and we still have Disney engaged.”

While it may seem unorthodox, reaching out to the all-powerful Disney is actually a pretty smart move. The Obama administration will need a really big heavyweight on their side since the two subcommittees in Washington that oversee climate science, including NOAA and NASA, are now headed by a pair of GOP climate change deniers, Sen. Marco Rubio and Sen. Ted Cruz, a scarier situation that talking to your estranged sister in a palace made completely of ice.

(Mediaite has video of Papp speaking at the conference.)
