Warm winter hampers Central Oregon snow; Storms from the west, southwest not helping build snowpack
239
http://www.bendbulletin.com/localstate/2831265-151/warm-winter-hampers-central-oregon-snow?carousel=1

WANOGA SNO-PARK — Crossing Century Drive to access a snow measuring site this time of year typically includes a scramble up a snowbank.

“Cars are zipping by and you’re trying to get up there,” said Kurt Moffitt, a soil scientist for the federal Natural Resources Conservation Service.

No scrambling was needed Friday as the roadside was free of snow. The site, near Wanoga Sno-Park, had snow, but not much. Moffitt measured an average snow depth just under 10 inches, putting the snowpack there slightly more than 23 percent of the normal amount as determined by 30 years of data. The lack of snow comes as a sign of the relatively warm winter so far in Central Oregon and other parts of the state. High pressure ridges, warmer than normal surface temperatures in the Pacific Ocean and storms coming from the west and southwest have led to the warm winter, say weather and climate experts.

“The systems just haven’t been that cold because of how they approach us,” said Rob Brooks, a forecaster with the National Weather Service in Pendleton.

Storms from the west and southwest typically bring more rain than snow to Central Oregon, he said; storms from the northwest and north — the Gulf of Alaska and Canada — typically bring snow.

Experts are split on whether the warm winter is a sign of climate change. Kathie Dello, deputy director of the Oregon Climate Service at Oregon State University in Corvallis, said it is. Nick Bond, state climatologist for Washington at the University of Washington in Seattle, said it is not.

While Dello said the weather shows a warming trend, Bond said this could be a “weird” weather year.

They did agree the current weather offers a climate change preview.

“This is what the future looks like, warm winters and low snowpack,” Dello said.

“A year like this gets us a taste of what we think is going to happen more often,” Bond said.

February and March could yield storms that improve the snowpack, said Gabriella Coughlin, another soil scientist for the Conservation Service.

“There’s still time,” she said. She was out with Moffitt on Friday to check the snow near Bend for her first time. Federal scientists such as Moffitt and Coughlin do manual snow measurements at the end of January, February and March to cover elevations not recorded by automated equipment and double-check automated data.

Although a storm system is forecast to roll over Central Oregon this weekend and early next week, it probably will bring snow only to high elevations, Brooks, the weather service forecaster, said.

The forecast is not a good one for people keeping a close watch on the snowpack.

“We are in crunch time,” Dello said. “We need to start getting snow soon.”

— Reporter: 541-617-7812,

ddarling@bendbulletin.com
