Conservation Law Foundation Names New Clean Energy and Climate Change Director
272
http://www.clf.org/newsroom/clean-energy-director/

Conservation Law Foundation Names New Clean Energy and Climate Change Director

Contact:

Carol Gregory

cgregory@clf.org

617-850-1722

January 29, 2015, BOSTON –Conservation Law Foundation (CLF) announced today that it has named Greg Cunningham as Vice President and Director of the Clean Energy and Climate Change Program. Cunningham, a Senior Attorney with CLF for more than seven years, has served as the Interim Director of the Clean Energy and Climate Change Program for the past three months.

“Greg is a formidable force in shaping regional energy policy and is deeply respected by both allies and opponents,” said Sean Mahoney, Executive Vice President, Conservation Law Foundation. “He has an innate understanding of the unique opportunities for ensuring New England’s clean energy future that creatively and smartly addresses our climate challenges.”

Since joining CLF, Cunningham has been a leader in CLF’s fight to advance clean energy and to ensure that the role of natural gas is “right sized”. As the Director of the Clean Energy and Climate Change program, Cunningham will lead CLF’s advocacy to shutdown the last coal-fired power plant in New England, ensure smart planning for the role of natural gas in the transition to renewable energy, and push New England’s government leaders to take decisive action in planning for the impacts of climate change.

Cunningham is a seasoned environmental attorney. Prior to joining CLF in 2008, Cunningham spent ten years at Bernstein Shur Law Firm in Portland, Maine where he helped develop its environmental practice group. He also spent time as a partner in a toxic tort litigation firm.

He has served as the Chair of the Natural Resources Section of the Maine State Bar Association and co-authored the Maine Environmental Law Handbook. Additionally, he was a state-appointed member of the Maine Tribal State Commission .

Cunningham received his J.D. from Franklin Pierce Law Center, A Masters in Studies of Environmental Law from Vermont Law School and his undergraduate degree from Colby College.
